marlowe/doc/marlowe-step-by-step.adoc, before:

﻿
[#marlowe-step-by-step]
== Marlowe step by step

Marlowe has five ways of building contracts. Four of these – `Pay`, `Let`, `If` and `When` – build a complex contract from simpler contracts, and the fifth, `Close`, is a simple contract. At each step of execution, as well as returning a new state and continuation contract, it is possible that effects – payments – and warnings can be generated too.

In explaining these contracts we will also explain Marlowe _values_, _observations_ and _actions_, which are used to supply external information and inputs to a running contract to control how it will evolve.

=== Pay
A payment contract `Pay a p t v cont` will make a payment of value `v` of token `t` from the account `a` to a payee `p`, which will be one of the contract participants or another account in the contract. Warnings will be generated if the value `v` is negative, or if there is not enough in the account to make the payment in full (even if there are positive balances of other tokens in the account). In the latter case a partial payment (of all the money available) is made. The continuation contract is the one given in the contract: `cont`.

=== Close
A contract `Close` provides for the contract to be closed (or terminated). The only action that is performs is to provide refunds to the owners of accounts that contain a positive balance. This is performed one account per step, but all accounts will be refunded in a single transaction.

Before discussing other forms of contracts, we need to describe values, observations and actions.

=== Values, observations and actions
*Values* include some quantities that change with time, including “the current slot number”,footnote:[The presentation here is a simplification of the concrete implementation, in which transactions are associated with a slot interval during which it is valid to add them to the blockchain.The reason for this is that in general it is difficult to predict the precise slot in which a transaction will be accepted for inclusion on the blockchain; it is therefore more robust to specify an interval in which the transaction should be accepted. The view presented here is a simplification in that effectively we consider only intervals of length one.  So, a Marlowe contract is able to access the upper and lower bounds on the current slot interval, rather than the specific current slot value. Executing a contract can, in some circumstances, lead to an “ambiguous slot interval error”, but we do not cover that any further here.] “the current balance of some token in an account”, and any choices that have already been made; we call these _volatile_ values. Values can also be combined using addition, subtraction and negation, and can be conditional on an observation.

*Observations* are Boolean values derived by comparing values, and can be combined using the standard Boolean operators. It is also possible to observe whether any choice has been made (for a particular identified choice).

Observations will have a value at every step of execution. On the other hand, *actions* happen at particular points during execution. As noted earlier, actions can be

 * depositing money,
 * making a choice between various alternatives, or
 * notifying an external or oracle value, such as the current price of a particular commodity.

=== If
The conditional `If obs cont1 cont2` will continue as `cont1` or `cont2`, depending on the Boolean value of the observation `obs` when this construct is executed.

=== When
This is the most complex constructor for contracts, with the form `When cases timeout cont`. It is a contract that is _triggered on actions_, which may or may not happen at any particular slot: what happens when various actions happen is described by the _cases_ in the contract.

In the contract `When cases timeout cont`, the list `cases` contains a collection of cases. Each case has the form `Case ac co` where `ac` is an action and `co` a continuation (another contract). When a particular action, e.g. `ac`, happens, the state is updated accordingly and the contract will continue as the corresponding continuation `co`.

In order to make sure that the contract makes progress eventually, the contract  `When cases timeout cont` will continue as `cont` once the `timeout`, a slot number, is reached.

=== Let
A let contract `Let id val cont` allows a contract to _name a value_ using an identifier. In this case, the expression `val` is evaluated, and stored with the name `id`. The contract then continues as `cont`.

As well as allowing us to use abbreviations, this mechanism also means that we can capture and save volatile values that might be changing with time, e.g. the current price of oil, or the current slot number, at a particular point in the execution of the contract, to be used later on in contract execution.

Commit message:

Tutorial updates (#2417)
* Added images for oracles.

* Added content for oracles.

* nothing commit to force rebuild

* Update oracles section

* fix

Co-authored-by: Simon Thompson <s.j.thompson@kent.ac.uk>
Co-authored-by: Alexander Nemish <anemish@gmail.com>

marlowe/doc/marlowe-step-by-step.adoc, after:

﻿
[#marlowe-step-by-step]
== Marlowe step by step

Marlowe has five ways of building contracts. Four of these – `Pay`, `Let`, `If` and `When` – build a complex contract from simpler contracts, and the fifth, `Close`, is a simple contract. At each step of execution, as well as returning a new state and continuation contract, it is possible that effects – payments – and warnings can be generated too.

In explaining these contracts we will also explain Marlowe _values_, _observations_ and _actions_, which are used to supply external information and inputs to a running contract to control how it will evolve.

=== Pay
A payment contract `Pay a p t v cont` will make a payment of value `v` of token `t` from the account `a` to a payee `p`, which will be one of the contract participants or another account in the contract. Warnings will be generated if the value `v` is negative, or if there is not enough in the account to make the payment in full (even if there are positive balances of other tokens in the account). In the latter case a partial payment (of all the money available) is made. The continuation contract is the one given in the contract: `cont`.

=== Close
A contract `Close` provides for the contract to be closed (or terminated). The only action that is performs is to provide refunds to the owners of accounts that contain a positive balance. This is performed one account per step, but all accounts will be refunded in a single transaction.

Before discussing other forms of contracts, we need to describe values, observations and actions.

=== Values, observations and actions
*Values* include some quantities that change with time, including “the current slot number”,footnote:[The presentation here is a simplification of the concrete implementation, in which transactions are associated with a slot interval during which it is valid to add them to the blockchain.The reason for this is that in general it is difficult to predict the precise slot in which a transaction will be accepted for inclusion on the blockchain; it is therefore more robust to specify an interval in which the transaction should be accepted. The view presented here is a simplification in that effectively we consider only intervals of length one.  So, a Marlowe contract is able to access the upper and lower bounds on the current slot interval, rather than the specific current slot value. Executing a contract can, in some circumstances, lead to an “ambiguous slot interval error”, but we do not cover that any further here.] “the current balance of some token in an account”, and any choices that have already been made; we call these _volatile_ values. Values can also be combined using addition, subtraction and negation, and can be conditional on an observation.

*Observations* are Boolean values derived by comparing values, and can be combined using the standard Boolean operators. It is also possible to observe whether any choice has been made (for a particular identified choice).

Observations will have a value at every step of execution. On the other hand, *actions* happen at particular points during execution. As noted earlier, actions can be

 * depositing money,
 * making a choice between various alternatives, including an _oracle_ value (see next section), or
 * notifying an external value of some kind.

=== Oracles

Oracles are being developed for the Cardano blockchain in general, and will be available for use within Marlowe on Cardano. In the meantime we have introduced an _oracle prototype_, which is implemented in the Marlowe Playground.

We model Oracles as choices that made by a participant with a specific Oracle role, "kraken".

If a role in a contract is `"kraken"`, and that role makes a choice such as `"adausdt"` then, in the Playground simulation, this choice will be _pre-filled_, based on data from Cryptowat.ch, with the current value of the ADA/USD conversion rate.
You can find all supported currency pairs here https://api.cryptowat.ch/markets/kraken

Note, that we support only whole numbers as choice inputs. How then do we use current ADA/USD price, which is $0.098924? We simply multiply the price by 10^8^, so the price whould appear as 9892400. You can `Scale` the value after doing your calculations.

For example, you'd like to buy USDT for 12 ADA, using Oracle price.

Get the price:

  When [Choice (ChoiceId "adausdt" (Role "kraken") [Bound 1000000 10000000] ...

Calculate USDT amount

  Let (ValueId "amount of USDT in microcents")
    (MulValue
      (Constant 12)
      (ChoiceValue (ChoiceId "adausdt" (Role "kraken"))))

Scale the result down by 10^6^ to get amount in USDT cents.

  Scale (1%1000000) (UseValue (ValueId "amount of USDT in microcents")

=== If
The conditional `If obs cont1 cont2` will continue as `cont1` or `cont2`, depending on the Boolean value of the observation `obs` when this construct is executed.

=== When
This is the most complex constructor for contracts, with the form `When cases timeout cont`. It is a contract that is _triggered on actions_, which may or may not happen at any particular slot: what happens when various actions happen is described by the _cases_ in the contract.

In the contract `When cases timeout cont`, the list `cases` contains a collection of cases. Each case has the form `Case ac co` where `ac` is an action and `co` a continuation (another contract). When a particular action, e.g. `ac`, happens, the state is updated accordingly and the contract will continue as the corresponding continuation `co`.

In order to make sure that the contract makes progress eventually, the contract  `When cases timeout cont` will continue as `cont` once the `timeout`, a slot number, is reached.

=== Let
A let contract `Let id val cont` allows a contract to _name a value_ using an identifier. In this case, the expression `val` is evaluated, and stored with the name `id`. The contract then continues as `cont`.

As well as allowing us to use abbreviations, this mechanism also means that we can capture and save volatile values that might be changing with time, e.g. the current price of oil, or the current slot number, at a particular point in the execution of the contract, to be used later on in contract execution.
