marlowe/doc/playground-overview.adoc, before:

[#playground-overview]
== The Marlowe Playground

This tutorial gives an overview of the Marlowe Playground, an online
tool that allows users to create, to analyse, to interact with and to simulate the
operation of
embedded Marlowe contracts. It is available at {marloweplayground}.
// https://alpha.marlowe.iohkdev.io/[https://alpha.marlowe.iohkdev.io/]



=== Introducing the Marlowe Playground

For Marlowe to be usable in practice, users need to be able to
understand how contracts will behave once deployed to the blockchain,
but without doing the deployment. We can do that by simulating their
behaviour off-chain, interactively stepping through the evaluation of a
contract in the browser-based tool, the Marlowe Playground, a web tool
that supports the interactive construction, revision, and simulation of
smart-contracts written in Marlowe.

Contracts can be authored in four different ways in the Playground. We can write directly in Marlowe, or use the Blockly representation of Marlowe. Marlowe is also embedded in Haskell and JavaScript, and we can author contracts in these languages and then convert ("compile") them to Marlowe in the Playground.

image:authoring.png[Authoring contracts in the Marlowe Playground]

Once a contract has been written in Blockly, Haskell, or JavaScript, we can move to the Simulator to analyse and simulate the contract.

Work from the Playground can be saved as a github gist. This saves, as a *project*, everything in the Playground: not only the contracts but the current state of the simulation, the logs and so on. Projects can be reloaded or duplicated at a later time. Even without using github the project is saved between sessions, but this is _volatile_, and will be lost if browser caches are updated.

The rest of this section will cover the operation of the Playground in more detail. In later sections, two _experimental_ features, which are under active development, are also covered: xref:actus-labs#actus-labs[Actus Labs] and the xref:wallets-simulation#wallets-simulation[Wallet-level simulation].

We use *bold* type for buttons and other components in what follows.

=== Getting started

The landing page for the Marlowe Playground looks like this

image:landing-page.png[The landing page for the Playground]

The title bar has, at the right-hand side, links to this tutorial and the Actus Labs feature, and the *main menu* operations are shown below this.

* *New Project* This clears the existing project, and creates a new one, in a coding environment of the user's choice:

image:initial-env.png[Choosing the initial environment,width=600,align="center"]

* *Open Project* This opens a project that has been saved previously. See the section on <<_saving_and_opening_projects>> below for more details on setting this up.
* *Open Example* This will load an example into the existing project, in the environment chosen by the user.

image:open-example.png[Opening an example,width=600,align="center"]

* *Rename Project* Renames a project: the name is shown in the centre of the title bar.
* *Save Project* Saves a project. See the section <<_saving_and_opening_projects>> below.
* *Save as New Project* Saves the current project with a new name.

The program editor used in the Playground is the Monaco editor https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/ and many of its features are available, including the menu available on right-click.

=== The Haskell Editor: developing embedded contracts

The editor supports the development of Marlowe contracts described in Haskell. We can use Haskell to make contract definitions more readable by using Haskell definitions for sub-components, abbreviations, and simple template functions. The Haskell editor is shown in the following image.

image:haskell-editor.png[The Haskell editor]

The Haskell editor is open here on the Escrow example contained in the examples. To describe a Marlowe contract in the editor, we have to define a top-level value `contract` of type `Contract`; it is this value that is converted to pure Marlowe with the *Compile* button (in the top right-hand corner). If compilation is successful, the compiled code is shown in an overlay (which can be minimised):

image:haskell-compiled.png[Haskell code compiled to Marlowe]

On successful compilation the result can be sent to the simulator or to Blockly: these options are provided by the *Send to Simulator* and *Send to Blockly* buttons in the top right-hand corner of the page.

If the contract cannot successfully be converted to Marlowe, the errors are also shown in an overlay:

image:haskell-errors.png[Errors in compiling Haskell code to Marlowe]


=== The JavaScript Editor: developing embedded contracts

The editor supports the development of Marlowe contracts described in JavaScript, too. We can use JavaScript to make contract definitions more readable by using JS definitions for sub-components, abbreviations, and simple template functions. The JS editor is shown in the following image.

image:js-editor.png[The JavaScript editor]

The JS editor is open here on the Escrow example contained in the examples. To describe a Marlowe contract in the editor, the variable `contract` needs to be defined to something of type  `Contract`. 

image:js-editor-cont.png[The value of `contract` defines the contract.]

The editor supports auto-complete, error checking during editing, and information about bindings on mouse over. In particular, using mouse over on any of the imported bindings will show its type (in TypeScript).

When you click the *Compile* button (in the top right-hand corner), the code in the editor is executed, and the JSON object in the variable `contract` resulting from the execution is parsed into an actual Marlowe contract that can then be sent to the Simulation tab where it can be simulated.

If compilation is successful, the compiled code is shown in an overlay (which can be minimised):

image:js-compiled.png[JS code compiled to Marlowe]

On successful compilation the result can be sent to the simulator using the *Send to Simulator*  
button in the top right-hand corner of the page.

If the contract cannot successfully be converted to Marlowe, the errors are also shown in an overlay:

image:js-error.png[Errors in compiling JS code to Marlowe]

=== Developing contracts in Blockly

The playground provides a mechanism for creating and viewing contracts in a visual form, rather than in text. This is discussed in this earlier section on xref:playground-blockly#playground-blockly[Blockly].

=== Developing contracts in Marlowe

It is also possible to create contracts in "raw" Marlowe too, and this is performed in the simulation environment. Marlowe is edited in the Monaco editor, and this gives automatic  formatting (on right click) and supports *holes* too. 

image:marlowe-editor.png[Editing Marlowe: using holes]

Holes allow a program to be built top-down. Clicking the lightbulb next to a hole presents a completion menu, in each case replacing each sub component by a new hole. For example, choosing `Pay` to fill the top-level hole will result in this:

image:marlowe-hole-fill.png[Editing Marlowe: filling a hole]

Holes can be combined with ordinary text editing, so that you can use a mixture of bottom-up and top-down constructs in building Marlowe contracts. Moreover, contracts with holes can be transferred to and from Blockly: holes in Marlowe become literal holes in Blockly. To transfer to Blockly use the *View in Blockly Editor* in the top right-hand corner of the screen.

=== Simulating Marlowe contracts

However a contract is written, when it is sent to simulation this is the view seen first.

image:simulation-tab.png[The Simulation pane]

The code shown here presents whatever of the contract remains to be simulated, and the pane at the foot gives data about the simulation, as well as giving access to _static analysis_ for the contract (from its current state).

Simulation is started by clicking the *Start simulation* button, and once this is done, the available actions that will advance the contract are presented;

image:available-actions.png[The actions available, width=300]

In this case there are two potential actions: Alice can make a deposit, or the slot (time) can advance to `10` at which the wait for a deposit times out. Two other generic actions can be taken too

* *Undo* will undo the last action made in the simulator. This means that we can explore a contract interactively, making some moves, undoing some of them, and then proceeding in a different direction.
* *Reset* will reset the contract and its state back to their initial values: the full contract and an empty state. It also _stops_ the simulation.

For our example, let us select for Alice to make the deposit of 450 lovelace. We can do that with the *+* button next to this input. After doing that we see

image:simulation2.png[Simulation step 2]

Where we see at the foot of the screen that the deposit has taken place. 

This remains in view if we then make Alice's and then Bob's choice. Note also that the current state of the contract is shown in the main part of the window, and indeed we are waiting at this stage for a choice from Alice.

If Alice and Bob make different choices we then see

image:simulation3.png[Simulation step 3]

and at this point in the evolution of the contract we are awaiting a choice from Carol to arbitrate the outcome.

=== Saving and Opening Projects

Projects can be saved on github, and so when you first save a project you will be prompted thus:

image:github1.png[Prompt to login to github]

and, if you choose to *Login* there, you will be taken to a login screen for github:

image:github2.png[Logging in to github,width=300]

When you opt to *Open Project* you will be presented with a choice like this:

image:github3.png[Open project choice]

The Marlowe Playground does not provide a mechanism for deleting projects, but this can be done directly on github.


=== Analysing a contract

The static analysis of a contract is performed by selecting the *Static analysis* tab in the pane at the foot of the page.

image:static-analysis.png[Static analysis]

Clicking the *Analyse for warnings* button results in the current contract _in the current state_ being analysed. The result is either to say that the contract passed all the tests, or to explain how it fails, and giving the sequence of transactions that lead to the error. As an exercise try this with the `Escrow` contract, changing the initial deposit from Alice to something smaller than 450 lovelace. More details are given in the section on xref:static-analysis#static-analysis[] below.

The *Analyse reachability* button will check whether any parts of a contract will never be executed, however participants interact with it.


[caption=""]
.Exercise
====

Use the Marlowe Playground to interact with the `+escrow+` contract in
the various scenarios discussed in the tutorial on
xref:using-marlowe#using-marlowe[using Marlowe].

Explore making some changes to the contract and interactions with those
modified contracts.
====

[caption=""]
.Exercise
====

Use the Marlowe Playground to explore the other examples presented in
there: the deposit incentive contract, and the crowd-funding example.
====

Commit message:

Tutorial updates (#2417)
* Added images for oracles.

* Added content for oracles.

* nothing commit to force rebuild

* Update oracles section

* fix

Co-authored-by: Simon Thompson <s.j.thompson@kent.ac.uk>
Co-authored-by: Alexander Nemish <anemish@gmail.com>

marlowe/doc/playground-overview.adoc, after:

[#playground-overview]
== The Marlowe Playground

This tutorial gives an overview of the Marlowe Playground, an online
tool that allows users to create, to analyse, to interact with and to simulate the
operation of
embedded Marlowe contracts. It is available at {marloweplayground}.
// https://alpha.marlowe.iohkdev.io/[https://alpha.marlowe.iohkdev.io/]



=== Introducing the Marlowe Playground

For Marlowe to be usable in practice, users need to be able to
understand how contracts will behave once deployed to the blockchain,
but without doing the deployment. We can do that by simulating their
behaviour off-chain, interactively stepping through the evaluation of a
contract in the browser-based tool, the Marlowe Playground, a web tool
that supports the interactive construction, revision, and simulation of
smart-contracts written in Marlowe.

Contracts can be authored in four different ways in the Playground. We can write directly in Marlowe, or use the Blockly representation of Marlowe. Marlowe is also embedded in Haskell and JavaScript, and we can author contracts in these languages and then convert ("compile") them to Marlowe in the Playground.

image:authoring.png[Authoring contracts in the Marlowe Playground]

Once a contract has been written in Blockly, Haskell, or JavaScript, we can move to the Simulator to analyse and simulate the contract.

Work from the Playground can be saved as a github gist. This saves, as a *project*, everything in the Playground: not only the contracts but the current state of the simulation, the logs and so on. Projects can be reloaded or duplicated at a later time. Even without using github the project is saved between sessions, but this is _volatile_, and will be lost if browser caches are updated.

The rest of this section will cover the operation of the Playground in more detail. In later sections, two _experimental_ features, which are under active development, are also covered: xref:actus-labs#actus-labs[Actus Labs] and the xref:wallets-simulation#wallets-simulation[Wallet-level simulation].

We use *bold* type for buttons and other components in what follows.

=== Getting started

The landing page for the Marlowe Playground looks like this

image:landing-page.png[The landing page for the Playground]

The title bar has, at the right-hand side, links to this tutorial and the Actus Labs feature, and the *main menu* operations are shown below this.

* *New Project* This clears the existing project, and creates a new one, in a coding environment of the user's choice:

image:initial-env.png[Choosing the initial environment,width=600,align="center"]

* *Open Project* This opens a project that has been saved previously. See the section on <<_saving_and_opening_projects>> below for more details on setting this up.
* *Open Example* This will load an example into the existing project, in the environment chosen by the user.

image:open-example.png[Opening an example,width=600,align="center"]

* *Rename Project* Renames a project: the name is shown in the centre of the title bar.
* *Save Project* Saves a project. See the section <<_saving_and_opening_projects>> below.
* *Save as New Project* Saves the current project with a new name.

The program editor used in the Playground is the Monaco editor https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/ and many of its features are available, including the menu available on right-click.

=== The Haskell Editor: developing embedded contracts

The editor supports the development of Marlowe contracts described in Haskell. We can use Haskell to make contract definitions more readable by using Haskell definitions for sub-components, abbreviations, and simple template functions. The Haskell editor is shown in the following image.

image:haskell-editor.png[The Haskell editor]

The Haskell editor is open here on the Escrow example contained in the examples. To describe a Marlowe contract in the editor, we have to define a top-level value `contract` of type `Contract`; it is this value that is converted to pure Marlowe with the *Compile* button (in the top right-hand corner). If compilation is successful, the compiled code is shown in an overlay (which can be minimised):

image:haskell-compiled.png[Haskell code compiled to Marlowe]

On successful compilation the result can be sent to the simulator or to Blockly: these options are provided by the *Send to Simulator* and *Send to Blockly* buttons in the top right-hand corner of the page.

If the contract cannot successfully be converted to Marlowe, the errors are also shown in an overlay:

image:haskell-errors.png[Errors in compiling Haskell code to Marlowe]


=== The JavaScript Editor: developing embedded contracts

The editor supports the development of Marlowe contracts described in JavaScript, too. We can use JavaScript to make contract definitions more readable by using JS definitions for sub-components, abbreviations, and simple template functions. The JS editor is shown in the following image.

image:js-editor.png[The JavaScript editor]

The JS editor is open here on the Escrow example contained in the examples. To describe a Marlowe contract in the editor, the variable `contract` needs to be defined to something of type  `Contract`. 

image:js-editor-cont.png[The value of `contract` defines the contract.]

The editor supports auto-complete, error checking during editing, and information about bindings on mouse over. In particular, using mouse over on any of the imported bindings will show its type (in TypeScript).

When you click the *Compile* button (in the top right-hand corner), the code in the editor is executed, and the JSON object in the variable `contract` resulting from the execution is parsed into an actual Marlowe contract that can then be sent to the Simulation tab where it can be simulated.

If compilation is successful, the compiled code is shown in an overlay (which can be minimised):

image:js-compiled.png[JS code compiled to Marlowe]

On successful compilation the result can be sent to the simulator using the *Send to Simulator*  
button in the top right-hand corner of the page.

If the contract cannot successfully be converted to Marlowe, the errors are also shown in an overlay:

image:js-error.png[Errors in compiling JS code to Marlowe]

=== Developing contracts in Blockly

The playground provides a mechanism for creating and viewing contracts in a visual form, rather than in text. This is discussed in this earlier section on xref:playground-blockly#playground-blockly[Blockly].

=== Developing contracts in Marlowe

It is also possible to create contracts in "raw" Marlowe too, and this is performed in the simulation environment. Marlowe is edited in the Monaco editor, and this gives automatic  formatting (on right click) and supports *holes* too. 

image:marlowe-editor.png[Editing Marlowe: using holes]

Holes allow a program to be built top-down. Clicking the lightbulb next to a hole presents a completion menu, in each case replacing each sub component by a new hole. For example, choosing `Pay` to fill the top-level hole will result in this:

image:marlowe-hole-fill.png[Editing Marlowe: filling a hole]

Holes can be combined with ordinary text editing, so that you can use a mixture of bottom-up and top-down constructs in building Marlowe contracts. Moreover, contracts with holes can be transferred to and from Blockly: holes in Marlowe become literal holes in Blockly. To transfer to Blockly use the *View in Blockly Editor* in the top right-hand corner of the screen.

=== Simulating Marlowe contracts

However a contract is written, when it is sent to simulation this is the view seen first.

image:simulation-tab.png[The Simulation pane]

The code shown here presents whatever of the contract remains to be simulated, and the pane at the foot gives data about the simulation, as well as giving access to _static analysis_ for the contract (from its current state).

Simulation is started by clicking the *Start simulation* button, and once this is done, the available actions that will advance the contract are presented;

image:available-actions.png[The actions available, width=300]

In this case there are two potential actions: Alice can make a deposit, or the slot (time) can advance to `10` at which the wait for a deposit times out. Two other generic actions can be taken too

* *Undo* will undo the last action made in the simulator. This means that we can explore a contract interactively, making some moves, undoing some of them, and then proceeding in a different direction.
* *Reset* will reset the contract and its state back to their initial values: the full contract and an empty state. It also _stops_ the simulation.

For our example, let us select for Alice to make the deposit of 450 lovelace. We can do that with the *+* button next to this input. After doing that we see

image:simulation2.png[Simulation step 2]

Where we see at the foot of the screen that the deposit has taken place. 

This remains in view if we then make Alice's and then Bob's choice. Note also that the current state of the contract is shown in the main part of the window, and indeed we are waiting at this stage for a choice from Alice.

If Alice and Bob make different choices we then see

image:simulation3.png[Simulation step 3]

and at this point in the evolution of the contract we are awaiting a choice from Carol to arbitrate the outcome.

=== Oracle simulation

As we noted earlier in the section on <<_oracles>>, the Playground provides oracle values to simulations for the role `"kraken"`. When the simulation reaches the point of simulating this construct

image:oracles1.png[Asking for an oracle value,width=300]

then the value is _pre-filled_ in the simulation like this:

image:oracles2.png[Providing an oracle value,width=400]



=== Saving and Opening Projects

Projects can be saved on github, and so when you first save a project you will be prompted thus:

image:github1.png[Prompt to login to github]

and, if you choose to *Login* there, you will be taken to a login screen for github:

image:github2.png[Logging in to github,width=300]

When you opt to *Open Project* you will be presented with a choice like this:

image:github3.png[Open project choice]

The Marlowe Playground does not provide a mechanism for deleting projects, but this can be done directly on github.


=== Analysing a contract

The static analysis of a contract is performed by selecting the *Static analysis* tab in the pane at the foot of the page.

image:static-analysis.png[Static analysis]

Clicking the *Analyse for warnings* button results in the current contract _in the current state_ being analysed. The result is either to say that the contract passed all the tests, or to explain how it fails, and giving the sequence of transactions that lead to the error. As an exercise try this with the `Escrow` contract, changing the initial deposit from Alice to something smaller than 450 lovelace. More details are given in the section on xref:static-analysis#static-analysis[] below.

The *Analyse reachability* button will check whether any parts of a contract will never be executed, however participants interact with it.


[caption=""]
.Exercise
====

Use the Marlowe Playground to interact with the `+escrow+` contract in
the various scenarios discussed in the tutorial on
xref:using-marlowe#using-marlowe[using Marlowe].

Explore making some changes to the contract and interactions with those
modified contracts.
====

[caption=""]
.Exercise
====

Use the Marlowe Playground to explore the other examples presented in
there: the deposit incentive contract, and the crowd-funding example.
====
