doc/marlowe/tutorials/marlowe-step-by-step.rst, before:

.. _marlowe-step-by-step:

Marlowe step by step
====================

Marlowe has six ways of building contracts. Five of these – ``Pay``,
``Let``, ``If``, ``When`` and ``Assert`` – build a complex contract from
simpler contracts, and the sixth, ``Close``, is a simple contract. At
each step of execution, as well as returning a new state and
continuation contract, it is possible that effects – payments – and
warnings can be generated too.

In explaining these contracts we will also explain Marlowe *values*,
*observations* and *actions*, which are used to supply external
information and inputs to a running contract to control how it will
evolve.

Pay
---

A payment contract ``Pay a p t v cont`` will make a payment of value
``v`` of token ``t`` from the account ``a`` to a payee ``p``, which will
be one of the contract participants or another account in the contract.
Warnings will be generated if the value ``v`` is negative, or if there
is not enough in the account to make the payment in full (even if there
are positive balances of other tokens in the account). In the latter
case a partial payment (of all the money available) is made. The
continuation contract is the one given in the contract: ``cont``.

Close
-----

A contract ``Close`` provides for the contract to be closed (or
terminated). The only action that is performs is to provide refunds to
the owners of accounts that contain a positive balance. This is
performed one account per step, but all accounts will be refunded in a
single transaction.

Before discussing other forms of contracts, we need to describe values,
observations and actions.

Values, observations and actions
--------------------------------

**Values** include some quantities that change with time, including “the
current slot number”, [1]_ “the current balance of some token in an
account”, and any choices that have already been made; we call these
*volatile* values. Values can also be combined using addition,
subtraction and negation, and can be conditional on an observation.

**Observations** are Boolean values derived by comparing values, and can
be combined using the standard Boolean operators. It is also possible to
observe whether any choice has been made (for a particular identified
choice).

Observations will have a value at every step of execution. On the other
hand, **actions** happen at particular points during execution. As noted
earlier, actions can be

-  depositing money,

-  making a choice between various alternatives, including an *oracle*
   value (see next section), or

-  notifying an external value of some kind.

Oracles
-------

Oracles are being developed for the Cardano blockchain in general, and
will be available for use within Marlowe on Cardano. In the meantime we
have introduced an *oracle prototype*, which is implemented in the
Marlowe Playground.

We model Oracles as choices that made by a participant with a specific
Oracle role, "kraken".

If a role in a contract is ``"kraken"``, and that role makes a choice
such as ``"adausdt"`` then, in the Playground simulation, this choice
will be *pre-filled*, based on data from Cryptowat.ch, with the current
value of the ADA/USD conversion rate. You can find all supported
currency pairs here https://api.cryptowat.ch/markets/kraken

Note, that we support only whole numbers as choice inputs. How then do
we use current ADA/USD price, which is $0.098924? We simply multiply the
price by 10\ :sup:`8`, so the price whould appear as 9892400. You can
``Scale`` the value after doing your calculations.

For example, you’d like to buy USDT for 12 ADA, using Oracle price.

Get the price:

::

   When [Choice (ChoiceId "adausdt" (Role "kraken") [Bound 1000000 10000000] ...

Calculate USDT amount

::

   Let (ValueId "amount of USDT in microcents")
     (MulValue
       (Constant 12)
       (ChoiceValue (ChoiceId "adausdt" (Role "kraken"))))

Scale the result down by 10\ :sup:`6` to get amount in USDT cents.

::

   Scale (1%1000000) (UseValue (ValueId "amount of USDT in microcents")

If
--

The conditional ``If obs cont1 cont2`` will continue as ``cont1`` or
``cont2``, depending on the Boolean value of the observation ``obs``
when this construct is executed.

When
----

This is the most complex constructor for contracts, with the form
``When cases timeout cont``. It is a contract that is *triggered on
actions*, which may or may not happen at any particular slot: what
happens when various actions happen is described by the *cases* in the
contract.

In the contract ``When cases timeout cont``, the list ``cases`` contains
a collection of cases. Each case has the form ``Case ac co`` where
``ac`` is an action and ``co`` a continuation (another contract). When a
particular action, e.g. ``ac``, happens, the state is updated
accordingly and the contract will continue as the corresponding
continuation ``co``.

In order to make sure that the contract makes progress eventually, the
contract ``When cases timeout cont`` will continue as ``cont`` once the
``timeout``, a slot number, is reached.

Let
---

A let contract ``Let id val cont`` allows a contract to *name a value*
using an identifier. In this case, the expression ``val`` is evaluated,
and stored with the name ``id``. The contract then continues as
``cont``.

As well as allowing us to use abbreviations, this mechanism also means
that we can capture and save volatile values that might be changing with
time, e.g. the current price of oil, or the current slot number, at a
particular point in the execution of the contract, to be used later on
in contract execution.

Assert
------

An assert contract ``Assert obs cont`` does not have any effect on the
state of the contract, it immediately continues as ``cont``, but it
issues a warning when the observation ``obs`` is false. It can be used
to ensure that a property holds in any given point of the contract,
since static analysis will fail if any execution causes an assert to be
false.

.. [1]
   The presentation here is a simplification of the concrete
   implementation, in which transactions are associated with a slot
   interval during which it is valid to add them to the blockchain.The
   reason for this is that in general it is difficult to predict the
   precise slot in which a transaction will be accepted for inclusion on
   the blockchain; it is therefore more robust to specify an interval in
   which the transaction should be accepted. The view presented here is
   a simplification in that effectively we consider only intervals of
   length one. So, a Marlowe contract is able to access the upper and
   lower bounds on the current slot interval, rather than the specific
   current slot value. Executing a contract can, in some circumstances,
   lead to an “ambiguous slot interval error”, but we do not cover that
   any further here.

Commit message:

Add support for inverse rates in kraken queries

doc/marlowe/tutorials/marlowe-step-by-step.rst, after:

.. _marlowe-step-by-step:

Marlowe step by step
====================

Marlowe has six ways of building contracts. Five of these – ``Pay``,
``Let``, ``If``, ``When`` and ``Assert`` – build a complex contract from
simpler contracts, and the sixth, ``Close``, is a simple contract. At
each step of execution, as well as returning a new state and
continuation contract, it is possible that effects – payments – and
warnings can be generated too.

In explaining these contracts we will also explain Marlowe *values*,
*observations* and *actions*, which are used to supply external
information and inputs to a running contract to control how it will
evolve.

Pay
---

A payment contract ``Pay a p t v cont`` will make a payment of value
``v`` of token ``t`` from the account ``a`` to a payee ``p``, which will
be one of the contract participants or another account in the contract.
Warnings will be generated if the value ``v`` is negative, or if there
is not enough in the account to make the payment in full (even if there
are positive balances of other tokens in the account). In the latter
case a partial payment (of all the money available) is made. The
continuation contract is the one given in the contract: ``cont``.

Close
-----

A contract ``Close`` provides for the contract to be closed (or
terminated). The only action that is performs is to provide refunds to
the owners of accounts that contain a positive balance. This is
performed one account per step, but all accounts will be refunded in a
single transaction.

Before discussing other forms of contracts, we need to describe values,
observations and actions.

Values, observations and actions
--------------------------------

**Values** include some quantities that change with time, including “the
current slot number”, [1]_ “the current balance of some token in an
account”, and any choices that have already been made; we call these
*volatile* values. Values can also be combined using addition,
subtraction and negation, and can be conditional on an observation.

**Observations** are Boolean values derived by comparing values, and can
be combined using the standard Boolean operators. It is also possible to
observe whether any choice has been made (for a particular identified
choice).

Observations will have a value at every step of execution. On the other
hand, **actions** happen at particular points during execution. As noted
earlier, actions can be

-  depositing money,

-  making a choice between various alternatives, including an *oracle*
   value (see next section), or

-  notifying an external value of some kind.

Oracles
-------

Oracles are being developed for the Cardano blockchain in general, and
will be available for use within Marlowe on Cardano. In the meantime we
have introduced an *oracle prototype*, which is implemented in the
Marlowe Playground.

We model Oracles as choices that made by a participant with a specific
Oracle role, "kraken".

If a role in a contract is ``"kraken"``, and that role makes a choice
such as ``"dir-adausd"`` then, in the Playground simulation, this choice
will be *pre-filled*, based on data from Cryptowat.ch, with the current
value of the *direct* ADA/USD conversion rate. You can find all supported
currency pairs here https://api.cryptowat.ch/markets/kraken

It is also possible to obtain the *inverse* rates of currency pairs listed
by adding the prefix ``inv-`` instead. For example, ``"inv-adausd"`` would
return the value of the USD/ADA conversion rate.

Note, that we support only whole numbers as choice inputs. How then do
we use current ADA/USD price, which is $0.098924? We simply multiply the
price by 10\ :sup:`8`, so the price whould appear as 9892400. You can
``Scale`` the value after doing your calculations.

For example, you’d like to buy USDT for 12 ADA, using Oracle price.

Get the price:

::

   When [Choice (ChoiceId "dir-adausdt" (Role "kraken") [Bound 1000000 10000000] ...

Calculate USDT amount

::

   Let (ValueId "amount of USDT in microcents")
     (MulValue
       (Constant 12)
       (ChoiceValue (ChoiceId "dir-adausdt" (Role "kraken"))))

Scale the result down by 10\ :sup:`6` to get amount in USDT cents.

::

   Scale (1%1000000) (UseValue (ValueId "amount of USDT in microcents")

If
--

The conditional ``If obs cont1 cont2`` will continue as ``cont1`` or
``cont2``, depending on the Boolean value of the observation ``obs``
when this construct is executed.

When
----

This is the most complex constructor for contracts, with the form
``When cases timeout cont``. It is a contract that is *triggered on
actions*, which may or may not happen at any particular slot: what
happens when various actions happen is described by the *cases* in the
contract.

In the contract ``When cases timeout cont``, the list ``cases`` contains
a collection of cases. Each case has the form ``Case ac co`` where
``ac`` is an action and ``co`` a continuation (another contract). When a
particular action, e.g. ``ac``, happens, the state is updated
accordingly and the contract will continue as the corresponding
continuation ``co``.

In order to make sure that the contract makes progress eventually, the
contract ``When cases timeout cont`` will continue as ``cont`` once the
``timeout``, a slot number, is reached.

Let
---

A let contract ``Let id val cont`` allows a contract to *name a value*
using an identifier. In this case, the expression ``val`` is evaluated,
and stored with the name ``id``. The contract then continues as
``cont``.

As well as allowing us to use abbreviations, this mechanism also means
that we can capture and save volatile values that might be changing with
time, e.g. the current price of oil, or the current slot number, at a
particular point in the execution of the contract, to be used later on
in contract execution.

Assert
------

An assert contract ``Assert obs cont`` does not have any effect on the
state of the contract, it immediately continues as ``cont``, but it
issues a warning when the observation ``obs`` is false. It can be used
to ensure that a property holds in any given point of the contract,
since static analysis will fail if any execution causes an assert to be
false.

.. [1]
   The presentation here is a simplification of the concrete
   implementation, in which transactions are associated with a slot
   interval during which it is valid to add them to the blockchain.The
   reason for this is that in general it is difficult to predict the
   precise slot in which a transaction will be accepted for inclusion on
   the blockchain; it is therefore more robust to specify an interval in
   which the transaction should be accepted. The view presented here is
   a simplification in that effectively we consider only intervals of
   length one. So, a Marlowe contract is able to access the upper and
   lower bounds on the current slot interval, rather than the specific
   current slot value. Executing a contract can, in some circumstances,
   lead to an “ambiguous slot interval error”, but we do not cover that
   any further here.
