---
title: "Proposed Edits -- Using Plutus Tx"
description: "Draft in progress for review and discussion"
date: 2024-04-26
---

# Section 5. Using Plutus Tx

> NOTE: Paragraph numbering is being used temporarily to help with organizing and editing content. 

1. High-level overview of how Plutus Tx works
   1.1 Key technique for implementing Plutus tx: staged metaprogramming

2. Basic syntax and structure of a Plutus Tx program
   2.1 Plutus-Tx-Template repo
   2.2 Template Haskell preliminaries
   2.3 Simple pattern
   2.4 Quotes
   2.5 Splicing quotes

3. Writing Plutus Tx Programs
   3.1 Plutus Tx standard usage pattern (how all of our Plutus Tx programs are written)
   3.2 Functions and datatypes
   3.3 Typeclasses
   3.4 The Plutus Tx Prelude
   3.5 Plutus Tx Prelude has redefined versions of many standard typeclasses
   3.6 Lifting values for generating code dynamically

4. Compiling Plutus Tx, describing the Plutus Tx compilation process

   4.1 GHC Extensions, Flags and Pragmas
      4.1.1 Extensions
      4.1.2 Flags
      4.1.3 Pragmas
   4.2 Reference: Plutus Tx Compiler Options

5. Troubleshooting and Debugging
   5.1 Common errors and how to fix them
   5.2 Debugging techniques for Plutus Tx programs

6. Real-world Examples and Use Cases
   6.1 Practical applications of Plutus Tx
   6.2 Case studies and code examples

## 1. High-level overview of how Plutus Tx works

A Plutus application, or `Plutus Tx` program, where 'Tx' indicates that the component usually goes into a transaction, is written as a single Haskell program. 
The Plutus Tx program describes both the code that runs off the chain (for example, on a user's computer, or in their wallet), and on the chain as part of transaction validation.
The parts of the program that describe the on-chain code are compiled into `Plutus Core`, rather than into the normal compilation target language (the languages or machine code that Haskell programs are usually compiled to in non-blockchain contexts, such as native machine code or intermediate languages).

### 1.1 Key technique for implementing Plutus tx: staged metaprogramming

The key technique that we use to implement Plutus Tx is called *staged metaprogramming*, which means that the main Haskell program generates *another* program (in this case, the Plutus Core program that will run on the blockchain). 
Plutus Tx is the mechanism we use to write those programs, but since Plutus Tx is just part of the main Haskell program, we can share types and definitions between the two.

## 2. Getting started with Plutus Tx

### 2.1 Plutus-Tx-Template repo

<!-- * Basic syntax and structure of a Plutus Tx program --->

### 2.2 Template Haskell preliminaries

Plutus Tx uses Haskell's metaprogramming support, Template Haskell, for two main reasons:

-   Template Haskell enables us to work at compile time, which is when we do Plutus Tx compilation.
-   It allows us to wire up the machinery that invokes the Plutus Tx compiler.

### 2.3 Simple pattern

Template Haskell is very versatile, but we only use a few features.
Essentially, we often use the same simple pattern: 

- make a quote, 
- immediately call `PlutusTx.TH.compile`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"}, and then 
- splice the result back in.

### 2.4 Quotes

Template Haskell begins with *quotes*. A Template Haskell quote is a Haskell expression `e` inside special brackets `[|| e ||]`. 
It has type `Q (TExp a)` where `e` has type `a`. 
`TExp a` is a *representation* of an expression of type `a`; in other words, the syntax of the actual Haskell expression that was quoted. 
The quote lives in the type `Q` of quotes, which isn't very interesting for us.

> **NOTE:**
> 
> There is also an abbreviation `TExpQ a` for `Q (TExp a)`, which avoids some parentheses.

### 2.5 Splicing quotes

You can *splice* a quote into your program using the `$$` operator. 
This inserts the syntax represented by the quote into the program at the point where the splice is written.

Simply put, a quote allows us to talk about Haskell programs as *values*.

The Plutus Tx compiler compiles Haskell *expressions* (not values), so naturally it takes a quote (representing an expression) as an argument.
The result is a new quote, this time for a Haskell program that represents the *compiled* program. 
In Haskell, the type of `PlutusTx.TH.compile`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} is `TExpQ a → TExpQ (CompiledCode a)`. 
This is just what we already said:

-   `TExpQ a` is a quote representing a program of type `a`.
-   `TExpQ (CompiledCode a)` is a quote representing a compiled Plutus Core program.

> **NOTE:**
> 
> `PlutusTx.CompiledCode`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} also has a type parameter `a`, which corresponds to the type of the original expression.
> 
> This lets us "remember" the type of the original Haskell program we compiled.

Since `PlutusTx.TH.compile`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} produces a quote, to use the result we need to splice it back into our program. 
The Plutus Tx compiler runs when compiling the main program, and the compiled program will be inserted into the main program.

## 3. Writing Plutus Tx programs

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK1" end-before="BLOCK2"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

This simple program just evaluates to the integer `1`.

> **NOTE:**
> 
> The examples that show the Plutus Core generated from compilation include doctests. 
> The syntax of Plutus Core might look unfamiliar, since this syntax is used for the 'assembly language', which means you don't need to inspect the compiler's output. 

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK2" end-before="BLOCK3"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

We can see how the metaprogramming works: the Haskell program `1` was turned into a `CompiledCode Integer` at compile time, which we spliced into our Haskell program. 
We can inspect the generated program at runtime to see the generated Plutus Core (or to put it on the blockchain).

### 3.1 Plutus Tx standard usage pattern (how all of our Plutus Tx programs are written)

We also see the standard usage pattern: a TH quote, wrapped in a call to `PlutusTx.TH.compile`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"}, wrapped in a `$$` splice. 
This is how all our Plutus Tx programs are written.

The following is a slightly more complex program. 
It includes the identity function on integers.

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK3" end-before="BLOCK4"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

### 3.2 Functions and datatypes

You can use functions inside your expression. 
In practice, you will usually want to define the entirety of your Plutus Tx program as a definition outside the quote, and then simply call it inside the quote.

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK4" end-before="BLOCK5"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

We can use normal Haskell datatypes and pattern matching freely:

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK5" end-before="BLOCK6"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

Unlike functions, datatypes do not need any kind of special annotation to be used inside a quote, hence we can use types like `Maybe` from the Haskell `Prelude`. 
This works for your own datatypes too.

#### Example

Here's a small example with a datatype representing a potentially open-ended end date.

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK6" end-before="BLOCK7"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

We could also have defined the `pastEnd` function as a separate `INLINABLE` binding and just referred to it in the quote, but in this case, it's small enough to just write in place.

### 3.3 Typeclasses

So far we have used functions like `lessThanEqInteger` for comparing `Integer`s, which is much less convenient than `<` from the standard Haskell `Ord` typeclass.

While Plutus Tx does support typeclasses, we cannot use many of the standard typeclasses, since we require their class methods to be `INLINABLE`, and the implementations for types such as `Integer` use the Plutus Tx built-ins.

### 3.4 The Plutus Tx Prelude

The `PlutusTx.Prelude`{.interpreted-text role="hsmod"} module is a drop-in replacement for the normal Haskell Prelude, with some redefined functions and typeclasses that make it easier for the Plutus Tx compiler to handle (such as `INLINABLE`).

Use the Plutus Tx Prelude for code that you expect to compile with the Plutus Tx compiler. 
All the definitions in the Plutus Tx Prelude include working Haskell definitions, which means that you can use them in normal Haskell code too, although for normal Haskell code, the Haskell Prelude versions will probably perform better.

To use the Plutus Tx Prelude, use the `NoImplicitPrelude` language pragma and import `PlutusTx.Prelude`{.interpreted-text role="hsmod"}.

Plutus Tx includes some built-in types and functions for working with primitive data (integers and bytestrings), as well as a few special functions. 
These types are also exported from the Plutus Tx Prelude.

### 3.5 Plutus Tx Prelude has redefined versions of many standard typeclasses

Redefined versions of many standard typeclasses are available in the Plutus Tx Prelude. 
As such, you should be able to use most typeclass functions in your Plutus Tx programs.

For example, the following is a version of the `pastEnd` function using `<`. 
This will be compiled to exactly the same code as the previous definition.

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK7" end-before="BLOCK8"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

### 3.6 Lifting values for generating code dynamically

So far we've seen how to define pieces of code *statically* (when you *compile* your main Haskell program), but you might want to generate code *dynamically* (that is, when you *run* your main Haskell program).
For example, you might be writing the body of a transaction to initiate a crowdfunding smart contract, which would need to be parameterized by data determining the size of the goal, the campaign start and end times, and any additional data that may be required.

We can do this in the same way that we parameterize code in functional programming: write the static code as a *function* and provide the argument later to configure it.

In our case, there is a slight complication: we want to make the argument and apply the function to it at *runtime*. 
Plutus Tx addresses this through *lifting*. 
Lifting enables the use of the same types, both inside your Plutus Tx program *and* in the external code that uses it.

> **NOTE:**
> 
> In this context, *runtime* means the runtime of the main Haskell program, **not** when the Plutus Core runs on the chain. 
> We want to configure our code when the main Haskell program runs, as that is when we will be getting user input.

In this example, we add an add-one function.

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK8" end-before="BLOCK9"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

Now, suppose we want to apply this to `4` at runtime, giving us a program that computes to `5`. 
We need to *lift* the argument (`4`) from Haskell to Plutus Core, and then we need to apply the function to it.

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK9" end-before="BLOCK10"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

We lifted the argument using the `PlutusTx.liftCode`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} function. 
To use this, a type must have an instance of the `PlutusTx.Lift`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} class. 
For your own datatypes you should generate these with the `PlutusTx.makeLift`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} TH function from `PlutusTx.Lift`{.interpreted-text role="hsmod"}.

> **NOTE:**
> 
> `PlutusTx.liftCode`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} is relatively unsafe because it ignores any errors that might occur from lifting something that might not be supported. 
> There is a `PlutusTx.safeLiftCode`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} if you want to explicitly handle these occurrences.

The combined program applies the original compiled lambda to the lifted value (notice that the lambda is a bit complicated now, since we have compiled the addition into a built-in).

Here's an example with our custom datatype. The output is the encoded version of `False`.

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK10" end-before="BLOCK11"}
BasicPlutusTx.hs
:::

<!-- 
4. Compiling Plutus Tx 
   4.1 GHC Extensions, Flags and Pragmas
      4.1.1 Extensions
      4.1.2 Flags
      4.1.3 Pragmas
   4.2 Reference: Plutus Tx Compiler Options 
--->

## 4. Compiling Plutus Tx

> **Warning:**
> 
> Strictly speaking, while the majority of simple Haskell will work, only a subset of Haskell is supported by the Plutus Tx compiler. 
> The Plutus Tx compiler will tell you if you are attempting to use an unsupported component.

### 4.1 GHC Extensions, Flags and Pragmas

Plutus Tx is a subset of Haskell and is compiled to Untyped Plutus Core by the Plutus Tx compiler, a GHC (Glasgow Haskell Compiler) plugin.

In order to ensure the success and correct compilation of Plutus Tx programs, all Plutus Tx modules (that is, Haskell modules that contain code to be compiled by the Plutus Tx compiler) should use the following GHC extensions, flags and pragmas.

#### 4.1.1 Extensions

Plutus Tx modules should use the `Strict` extension: :

    {-# LANGUAGE Strict #-}

Unlike in Haskell, function applications in Plutus Tx are strict. 
In other words, when evaluating `(\x -> 42) (3 + 4)` the expression `3 + 4` is evaluated first, before evaluating the function body (`42`), even though `x` is not used in the function body. 
The `Strict` extension ensures that let bindings and patterns are also (by default) strict, for instance, evaluating `let x = 3 + 4 in 42` evaluates `3 + 4` first, even though `x` is not used.

Bang patterns and lazy patterns can be used to explicitly specify whether a let binding is strict or non-strict, as in `let !x = 3 + 4 in 42` (strict) and `let ~x = 3 + 4 in 42` (non-strict).
At this time, it is not possible to make function applications non-strict: `(\(~x) -> 42) (3 + 4)` still evaluates `3 + 4` strictly.

Making let bindings strict by default has the following advantages:

-   It makes let bindings and function applications semantically equivalent. For example, `let x = 3 + 4 in 42` has the same semantics as `(\x -> 42) (3 + 4)`. 
This is what one would come to expect, as it is the case in most other programming languages, regardless of whether the language is strict or non-strict. 
-   Untyped Plutus Core programs, which are compiled from Plutus Tx, are not evaluated lazily (unlike Haskell), that is, there is no memoization of the results of evaluated expressions. 
Thus using non-strict bindings can cause an expression to be inadvertently evaluated for an unbounded number of times. 
Consider `let x = <expensive> in \y -> x + y`. 
If `x` is non-strict, `<expensive>` will be evalutated every time `\y -> x + y` is applied to an argument, which means it can be evaluated 0 times, 1 time, 2 times, or any number of times (this is not the case if lazy evaluation was employed). 
On the other hand, if `x` is strict, it is always evaluated once, which is at most one more time than what is necessary.

#### 4.1.2 Flags

GHC has a variety of optimization flags, many of which are on by default. 
Although Plutus Tx is, syntactically, a subset of Haskell, it has different semantics and a different evaluation strategy (Haskell: non-strict semantics, call by need; Plutus Tx: strict semantics, call by value). As a result, some GHC optimizations are not helpful for Plutus Tx programs, and can even be harmful, in the sense that it can make Plutus Tx programs less efficient, or fail to be compiled. 
An example is the full laziness optimization, controlled by GHC flag `-ffull-laziness`, which floats let bindings out of lambdas whenever possible. 
Since Untyped Plutus Core does not employ lazy evaluation, the full laziness optimization is usually not beneficial, and can sometimes make a Plutus Tx program more expensive. 
Conversely, some GHC features must be turned on in order to ensure Plutus Tx programs are compiled successfully.

All Plutus Tx modules should use the following GHC flags:

    -fno-ignore-interface-pragmas
    -fno-omit-interface-pragmas
    -fno-full-laziness
    -fno-spec-constr
    -fno-specialise
    -fno-strictness
    -fno-unbox-strict-fields
    -fno-unbox-small-strict-fields

`-fno-ignore-interface-pragmas` and `-fno-omit-interface-pragmas` ensure unfoldings of Plutus Tx functions are available. 
The rest are GHC optimizations that are generally bad for Plutus Tx, and should thus be turned off.

These flags can be specified either in a Haskell module, for example: 

    {-# OPTIONS_GHC -fno-ignore-interface-pragmas #-}

or in a build file. 
For example, if your project is built using Cabal, you can add the flags to the `.cabal` files, like so:

> ghc-options:
>
> :   -fno-ignore-interface-pragmas

Note that this section only covers GHC flags, not Plutus Tx compiler flags. 
Information about the latter can be found in Reference > Writing scripts > Plutus Tx Compiler Options: `plutus_tx_options`.

#### 4.1.3 Pragmas

All functions and methods should have the `INLINEABLE` pragma, so that their unfoldings are made available to the Plutus Tx compiler.

The `-fexpose-all-unfoldings` flag also makes GHC expose all unfoldings, but unfoldings exposed this way can be more optimized than unfoldings exposed via `INLINEABLE`. 
In general, we do not want GHC to perform optimizations, since GHC optimizes a program based on the assumption that it has non-strict semantics and is evaluated lazily (call by need), which is not true for Plutus Tx programs. 
Therefore, `INLINEABLE` is preferred over `-fexpose-all-unfoldings`, even though the latter is simpler.

`-fexpose-all-unfoldings` can be useful for functions that are generated by GHC and do not have the `INLINEABLE` pragma. 
`-fspecialise` and `-fspec-constr` are two examples of optimizations that can generate such functions. 
The most reliable solution, however, is to simply turn these optimizations off. 
Another option is to bump `-funfolding-creation-threshold` to make it more likely for GHC to retain unfoldings for functions without the `INLINEABLE` pragma.
`-fexpose-all-unfoldings` should be used as a last resort.

### 4.2 Reference: Plutus Tx Compiler Options

A number of options can be passed to the Plutus Tx compiler. 
See `plutus_tx_options`{.interpreted-text role="ref"} for details.

## 5. Advanced Plutus Tx concepts

### 5.a Method for triggering a validation failure

The `PlutusTx.Builtins.error`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} built-in deserves a special mention. 
`PlutusTx.Builtins.error`{.interpreted-text role="hsobj"} causes the transaction to abort when it is evaluated, which is one way to trigger a validation failure.

