plutus-metatheory/src/Utils.lagda.md, before:

---
title: Utils
layout: page
---
```
module Utils where
```
## Imports
```
open import Relation.Binary.PropositionalEquality using (_≡_;refl;cong;sym;trans;cong₂;subst)
open import Function using (const;_∘_)
open import Data.Nat using (ℕ;zero;suc;_≤‴_;_≤_;_+_;_<_)
open _≤_
open _≤‴_
open import Data.Nat.Properties
               using (+-suc;m+1+n≢m;+-cancelˡ-≡;m≢1+n+m;m+1+n≢0;+-cancelʳ-≡;+-assoc;+-comm;+-identityʳ)
open import Relation.Binary using (Decidable)
import Data.Integer as I
import Data.List as L
open import Data.Sum using (_⊎_;inj₁;inj₂)
open import Relation.Nullary using (Dec;yes;no;¬_)
open import Data.Empty using (⊥;⊥-elim)
open import Data.Integer using (ℤ; +_)
open import Data.String using (String)
open import Data.Bool using (Bool)
open import Data.Maybe using (Maybe; just; nothing; maybe)
                           renaming (_>>=_ to mbind) public
open import Data.Unit using (⊤)

{-# FOREIGN GHC import Raw #-}

```
## Either

We cannot use the standard library's Either as it is not set up to
compile the Haskell's Either and compile pragmas have to go in the
same module as definitions.
```

data Either (A B : Set) : Set where
  inj₁ : A → Either A B
  inj₂ : B → Either A B

{-# COMPILE GHC Either = data Either (Left | Right) #-}

either : {A B C : Set} → Either A B → (A → C) → (B → C) → C
either (inj₁ a) f g = f a
either (inj₂ b) f g = g b

eitherBind : ∀{A B E} → Either E A → (A → Either E B) → Either E B
eitherBind (inj₁ e) f = inj₁ e
eitherBind (inj₂ a) f = f a

decIf : ∀{A B : Set} → Dec A → B → B → B
decIf (yes p) t f = t
decIf (no ¬p) t f = f

cong₃ : {A B C D : Set} → (f : A → B → C → D)
  → {a a' : A} → a ≡ a'
  → {b b' : B} → b ≡ b'
  → {c c' : C} → c ≡ c'
  → f a b c ≡ f a' b' c'
cong₃ f refl refl refl = refl

≡-subst-removable : ∀ {a p} {A : Set a}
                    (P : A → Set p) {x y} (p q : x ≡ y) z →
                    subst P p z ≡ subst P q z
≡-subst-removable P refl refl z = refl
 ```
## Natural Sum Type

The type `n ∔ n' ≡ m` takes two naturals `n` and `n'` such that they sum to m.
It is helpful when one wants to do `m` things, while keeping track
of the number of done things (`n`) and things to do (`n'`).
```

data _∔_≣_ : ℕ → ℕ → ℕ → Set where
  start : (n : ℕ) →  0 ∔ n ≣ n
  bubble : ∀{n n' m : ℕ} → n ∔ suc n' ≣ m → suc n ∔ n' ≣ m

unique∔ : ∀{n n' m : ℕ}(p p' : n ∔ n' ≣ m) → p ≡ p'
unique∔ (start _) (start _) = refl
unique∔ (bubble p) (bubble p') = cong bubble (unique∔ p p')


+2∔ : ∀(n m t : ℕ) → n + m ≡ t → n ∔ m ≣ t
+2∔ zero m .(zero + m) refl = start _
+2∔ (suc n) m t p = bubble (+2∔ n (suc m) t (trans (+-suc n m) p))

∔2+ : ∀{n m t : ℕ} → n ∔ m ≣ t  → n + m ≡ t
∔2+ (start _) = refl
∔2+ (bubble bt) = trans (sym (+-suc _ _)) (∔2+ bt)

alldone : ∀(n : ℕ) → n ∔ zero ≣ n
alldone n = +2∔ n 0 n (+-identityʳ n)

```
## Monads

This introduces the Monad operators.

```
record Monad (F : Set → Set) : Set₁ where
  field
    return : ∀{A} → A → F A
    _>>=_   : ∀{A B} → F A → (A → F B) → F B

  _>>_ : ∀{A B} → F A → F B → F B
  as >> bs = as >>= const bs

  fmap : ∀{A B} → (A → B) → F A → F B
  fmap f as = as >>= (return ∘ f)

open Monad {{...}} public

instance
  MaybeMonad : Monad Maybe
  MaybeMonad = record { return = just ; _>>=_ = mbind }

sumBind : {A B C : Set} → A ⊎ C → (A → B ⊎ C) → B ⊎ C
sumBind (inj₁ a) f = f a
sumBind (inj₂ c) f = inj₂ c

SumMonad : (C : Set) → Monad (_⊎ C)
SumMonad A = record { return = inj₁ ; _>>=_ = sumBind }

EitherMonad : (E : Set) → Monad (Either E)
EitherMonad E = record { return = inj₂ ; _>>=_ = eitherBind }

-- one instance to rule them all...
instance
  EitherP : {A : Set} → Monad (Either A)
  Monad.return EitherP = inj₂
  Monad._>>=_ EitherP  = eitherBind

withE : {A B C : Set} → (A → B) → Either A C → Either B C
withE f (inj₁ a) = inj₁ (f a)
withE f (inj₂ c) = inj₂ c

dec2Either : {A : Set} → Dec A → Either (¬ A) A
dec2Either (yes p) = inj₂ p
dec2Either (no ¬p) = inj₁ ¬p

```
# Writer Monad
```

record Writer (M : Set)(A : Set) : Set where
   constructor _,_
   field
     wrvalue : A
     accum : M

module WriterMonad {M : Set}(e : M)(_∙_ : M → M → M) where
  instance
    WriterMonad : Monad (Writer M)
    Monad.return WriterMonad x = x , e
    (WriterMonad Monad.>>= (x , w)) f = let (y , w') = f x in y , (w ∙ w')

  tell : (w : M) → Writer M ⊤
  tell w = _ , w

```
## Errors and ByteStrings

```
data RuntimeError : Set where
  gasError : RuntimeError
  userError : RuntimeError
  runtimeTypeError : RuntimeError

{-# COMPILE GHC RuntimeError = data RuntimeError (GasError | UserError | RuntimeTypeError) #-}

postulate ByteString : Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified Data.ByteString as BS #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC ByteString = type BS.ByteString #-}

postulate
  mkByteString : String → ByteString

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqByteString : ByteString → ByteString → Bool
eqByteString _ _ = Bool.true
{-# COMPILE GHC eqByteString = (==) #-}

```
## Record Types
```

record _×_ (A B : Set) : Set where
    constructor _,_
    field
      proj₁ : A
      proj₂ : B

infixr 4 _,_
infixr 2 _×_

{-# FOREIGN GHC type Pair a b = (a , b) #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC _×_ = data Pair ((,))  #-}

```
## Lists and Maps
```

data List (A : Set) : Set where
  []  : List A
  _∷_ : A → List A → List A

length : ∀ {A} → List A → ℕ
length [] = 0
length (x ∷ xs) = suc (length xs)

map : ∀{A B} → (A → B) → List A → List B
map f [] = []
map f (x ∷ xs) = f x ∷ map f xs

toList : ∀{A} →  List A → L.List A
toList [] = L.[]
toList (x ∷ xs) = x L.∷ toList xs

fromList : ∀{A} →  L.List A → List A
fromList L.[] = []
fromList (x L.∷ xs) = x ∷ fromList xs

-- Implementation of UPLC's dropList builtin
dropLIST : ∀{A} → ℤ → List A → List A
dropLIST (+ n) l = drop n l
  where drop : ∀{A} → ℕ → List A → List A
        drop zero xs = xs
        drop (suc n) [] = []
        drop (suc n) (_ ∷ xs) = drop n xs
dropLIST _ l = l

map-cong : ∀{A B : Set}{xs : L.List A}{f g : A → B}
     → (∀ x → f x ≡ g x)
     → L.map f xs ≡ L.map g xs
map-cong {xs = L.[]} p = refl
map-cong {xs = x L.∷ xs} p = cong₂ L._∷_ (p x) (map-cong p)

infixr 5 _∷_

{-# COMPILE GHC List = data [] ([] | (:)) #-}

```
## Arrays

```

postulate Array : Set → Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified Data.Vector.Strict as Strict #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC Array = type Strict.Vector #-}

variable A : Set

postulate
  HSlengthOfArray : Array A → ℤ
  HSlistToArray : (ls : List A) → Array A
  HSindexArray : Array A → ℤ → A
-- These have to consume the hidden {A : Set} param in the Agda.
{-# COMPILE GHC HSlengthOfArray = \() -> \as -> toInteger (Strict.length as) #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC HSlistToArray = \() -> Strict.fromList #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC HSindexArray = \() -> \as -> \i -> as Strict.! (fromInteger i) #-}

-- This only exists for literal arrays in certificates,
-- much like mkBytestring above.
postulate
  mkArray : {A : Set} → List A → Array A

```
## DATA
```

data DATA : Set where
  ConstrDATA :  I.ℤ → List DATA → DATA
  MapDATA : List (DATA × DATA) → DATA
  ListDATA : List DATA → DATA
  iDATA : I.ℤ → DATA
  bDATA : ByteString → DATA

{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Data as D #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC DATA = data Data (D.Constr | D.Map | D.List | D.I | D.B)   #-}

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
{-# TERMINATING #-}
eqDATA : DATA → DATA → Bool
eqDATA (ConstrDATA i₁ l₁) (ConstrDATA i₂ l₂) =
    (Relation.Nullary.isYes (i₁ Data.Integer.≟ i₂))
  Data.Bool.∧
    L.and (L.zipWith eqDATA (toList l₁) (toList l₂))
eqDATA (ConstrDATA x x₁) (MapDATA x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ConstrDATA x x₁) (ListDATA x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ConstrDATA x x₁) (iDATA x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ConstrDATA x x₁) (bDATA x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (MapDATA x) (ConstrDATA x₁ x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (MapDATA m₁) (MapDATA m₂) =
  L.and
    (L.zipWith
      (λ (x₁ , y₁) (x₂ , y₂) → eqDATA x₁ x₂ Data.Bool.∧ eqDATA y₁ y₂)
      (toList m₁)
      (toList m₂)
    )
eqDATA (MapDATA x) (ListDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (MapDATA x) (iDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (MapDATA x) (bDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (ConstrDATA x₁ x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (MapDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (ListDATA x₁) = L.and (L.zipWith eqDATA (toList x) (toList x₁))
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (iDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (bDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (iDATA x) (ConstrDATA x₁ x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (iDATA x) (MapDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (iDATA x) (ListDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (iDATA i₁) (iDATA i₂) = Relation.Nullary.isYes (i₁ Data.Integer.≟ i₂)
eqDATA (iDATA x) (bDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (bDATA x) (ConstrDATA x₁ x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (bDATA x) (MapDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (bDATA x) (ListDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (bDATA x) (iDATA x₁) = Bool.false
-- Warning: eqByteString is always trivially true at the Agda level.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqDATA (bDATA b₁) (bDATA b₂) = eqByteString b₁ b₂
{-# COMPILE GHC eqDATA = (==) #-}

postulate Bls12-381-G1-Element : Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified PlutusCore.Crypto.BLS12_381.G1 as G1 #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC Bls12-381-G1-Element = type G1.Element #-}

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqBls12-381-G1-Element : Bls12-381-G1-Element → Bls12-381-G1-Element → Bool
eqBls12-381-G1-Element _ _ = Bool.true
{-# COMPILE GHC eqBls12-381-G1-Element = (==) #-}

postulate Bls12-381-G2-Element : Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified PlutusCore.Crypto.BLS12_381.G2 as G2 #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC Bls12-381-G2-Element = type G2.Element #-}

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqBls12-381-G2-Element : Bls12-381-G2-Element → Bls12-381-G2-Element → Bool
eqBls12-381-G2-Element _ _ = Bool.true
{-# COMPILE GHC eqBls12-381-G2-Element = (==) #-}

postulate Bls12-381-MlResult : Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified PlutusCore.Crypto.BLS12_381.Pairing as Pairing #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC Bls12-381-MlResult = type Pairing.MlResult #-}

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqBls12-381-MlResult : Bls12-381-MlResult → Bls12-381-MlResult → Bool
eqBls12-381-MlResult _ _ = Bool.true
{-# COMPILE GHC eqBls12-381-MlResult = (==) #-}
```

## Kinds

The kind of types is `*`. Plutus core core is based on System Fω which
is higher order so we have `⇒` for type level functions. We also have
a kind called `#` which is used for builtin types.

```
data Kind : Set where
  *   : Kind               -- type
  ♯   : Kind               -- builtin
  _⇒_ : Kind → Kind → Kind -- function kind

{-# COMPILE GHC Kind = data KIND (Star | Sharp | Arrow )         #-}
```

Let `I`, `J`, `K` range over kinds:
```
variable
  I J K : Kind
```

Commit message:

Use Fin instead of nested Maybe for representing variables in Untyped syntax

plutus-metatheory/src/Utils.lagda.md, after:

---
title: Utils
layout: page
---
```
module Utils where
```
## Imports
```
open import Relation.Binary.PropositionalEquality using (_≡_;refl;cong;sym;trans;cong₂;subst)
open import Function using (const;_∘_)
open import Data.Nat using (ℕ;zero;suc;_≤‴_;_≤_;_+_;_<_;_<?_)
open import Data.Fin using (Fin;suc;zero;toℕ;fromℕ<)
open _≤_
open _≤‴_
open import Data.Nat.Properties
               using (+-suc;m+1+n≢m;+-cancelˡ-≡;m≢1+n+m;m+1+n≢0;+-cancelʳ-≡;+-assoc;+-comm;+-identityʳ)
open import Relation.Binary using (Decidable)
import Data.Integer as I
import Data.List as L
open import Data.Sum using (_⊎_;inj₁;inj₂)
open import Relation.Nullary using (Dec;yes;no;¬_)
open import Data.Empty using (⊥;⊥-elim)
open import Data.Integer using (ℤ; +_)
open import Data.String using (String)
open import Data.Bool using (Bool)
open import Data.Maybe using (Maybe; just; nothing; maybe)
                           renaming (_>>=_ to mbind) public
open import Data.Unit using (⊤)

{-# FOREIGN GHC import Raw #-}

```
## Either

We cannot use the standard library's Either as it is not set up to
compile the Haskell's Either and compile pragmas have to go in the
same module as definitions.
```

data Either (A B : Set) : Set where
  inj₁ : A → Either A B
  inj₂ : B → Either A B

{-# COMPILE GHC Either = data Either (Left | Right) #-}

either : {A B C : Set} → Either A B → (A → C) → (B → C) → C
either (inj₁ a) f g = f a
either (inj₂ b) f g = g b

eitherBind : ∀{A B E} → Either E A → (A → Either E B) → Either E B
eitherBind (inj₁ e) f = inj₁ e
eitherBind (inj₂ a) f = f a

decIf : ∀{A B : Set} → Dec A → B → B → B
decIf (yes p) t f = t
decIf (no ¬p) t f = f

maybeToEither : {A B : Set} → A → Maybe B → Either A B
maybeToEither x = maybe inj₂ (inj₁ x)

natToFin : {n : ℕ} → ℕ → Maybe (Fin n)
natToFin {n} m with m <? n
... | yes n<m = just (fromℕ< n<m)
... | no _ = nothing

cong₃ : {A B C D : Set} → (f : A → B → C → D)
  → {a a' : A} → a ≡ a'
  → {b b' : B} → b ≡ b'
  → {c c' : C} → c ≡ c'
  → f a b c ≡ f a' b' c'
cong₃ f refl refl refl = refl

≡-subst-removable : ∀ {a p} {A : Set a}
                    (P : A → Set p) {x y} (p q : x ≡ y) z →
                    subst P p z ≡ subst P q z
≡-subst-removable P refl refl z = refl
 ```
## Natural Sum Type

The type `n ∔ n' ≡ m` takes two naturals `n` and `n'` such that they sum to m.
It is helpful when one wants to do `m` things, while keeping track
of the number of done things (`n`) and things to do (`n'`).
```

data _∔_≣_ : ℕ → ℕ → ℕ → Set where
  start : (n : ℕ) →  0 ∔ n ≣ n
  bubble : ∀{n n' m : ℕ} → n ∔ suc n' ≣ m → suc n ∔ n' ≣ m

unique∔ : ∀{n n' m : ℕ}(p p' : n ∔ n' ≣ m) → p ≡ p'
unique∔ (start _) (start _) = refl
unique∔ (bubble p) (bubble p') = cong bubble (unique∔ p p')


+2∔ : ∀(n m t : ℕ) → n + m ≡ t → n ∔ m ≣ t
+2∔ zero m .(zero + m) refl = start _
+2∔ (suc n) m t p = bubble (+2∔ n (suc m) t (trans (+-suc n m) p))

∔2+ : ∀{n m t : ℕ} → n ∔ m ≣ t  → n + m ≡ t
∔2+ (start _) = refl
∔2+ (bubble bt) = trans (sym (+-suc _ _)) (∔2+ bt)

alldone : ∀(n : ℕ) → n ∔ zero ≣ n
alldone n = +2∔ n 0 n (+-identityʳ n)

```
## Monads

This introduces the Monad operators.

```
record Monad (F : Set → Set) : Set₁ where
  field
    return : ∀{A} → A → F A
    _>>=_   : ∀{A B} → F A → (A → F B) → F B

  _>>_ : ∀{A B} → F A → F B → F B
  as >> bs = as >>= const bs

  fmap : ∀{A B} → (A → B) → F A → F B
  fmap f as = as >>= (return ∘ f)

open Monad {{...}} public

instance
  MaybeMonad : Monad Maybe
  MaybeMonad = record { return = just ; _>>=_ = mbind }

sumBind : {A B C : Set} → A ⊎ C → (A → B ⊎ C) → B ⊎ C
sumBind (inj₁ a) f = f a
sumBind (inj₂ c) f = inj₂ c

SumMonad : (C : Set) → Monad (_⊎ C)
SumMonad A = record { return = inj₁ ; _>>=_ = sumBind }

EitherMonad : (E : Set) → Monad (Either E)
EitherMonad E = record { return = inj₂ ; _>>=_ = eitherBind }

-- one instance to rule them all...
instance
  EitherP : {A : Set} → Monad (Either A)
  Monad.return EitherP = inj₂
  Monad._>>=_ EitherP  = eitherBind

withE : {A B C : Set} → (A → B) → Either A C → Either B C
withE f (inj₁ a) = inj₁ (f a)
withE f (inj₂ c) = inj₂ c

dec2Either : {A : Set} → Dec A → Either (¬ A) A
dec2Either (yes p) = inj₂ p
dec2Either (no ¬p) = inj₁ ¬p

```
# Writer Monad
```

record Writer (M : Set)(A : Set) : Set where
   constructor _,_
   field
     wrvalue : A
     accum : M

module WriterMonad {M : Set}(e : M)(_∙_ : M → M → M) where
  instance
    WriterMonad : Monad (Writer M)
    Monad.return WriterMonad x = x , e
    (WriterMonad Monad.>>= (x , w)) f = let (y , w') = f x in y , (w ∙ w')

  tell : (w : M) → Writer M ⊤
  tell w = _ , w

```
## Errors and ByteStrings

```
data RuntimeError : Set where
  gasError : RuntimeError
  userError : RuntimeError
  runtimeTypeError : RuntimeError

{-# COMPILE GHC RuntimeError = data RuntimeError (GasError | UserError | RuntimeTypeError) #-}

postulate ByteString : Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified Data.ByteString as BS #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC ByteString = type BS.ByteString #-}

postulate
  mkByteString : String → ByteString

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqByteString : ByteString → ByteString → Bool
eqByteString _ _ = Bool.true
{-# COMPILE GHC eqByteString = (==) #-}

```
## Record Types
```

record _×_ (A B : Set) : Set where
    constructor _,_
    field
      proj₁ : A
      proj₂ : B

infixr 4 _,_
infixr 2 _×_

{-# FOREIGN GHC type Pair a b = (a , b) #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC _×_ = data Pair ((,))  #-}

```
## Lists and Maps
```

data List (A : Set) : Set where
  []  : List A
  _∷_ : A → List A → List A

length : ∀ {A} → List A → ℕ
length [] = 0
length (x ∷ xs) = suc (length xs)

map : ∀{A B} → (A → B) → List A → List B
map f [] = []
map f (x ∷ xs) = f x ∷ map f xs

toList : ∀{A} →  List A → L.List A
toList [] = L.[]
toList (x ∷ xs) = x L.∷ toList xs

fromList : ∀{A} →  L.List A → List A
fromList L.[] = []
fromList (x L.∷ xs) = x ∷ fromList xs

-- Implementation of UPLC's dropList builtin
dropLIST : ∀{A} → ℤ → List A → List A
dropLIST (+ n) l = drop n l
  where drop : ∀{A} → ℕ → List A → List A
        drop zero xs = xs
        drop (suc n) [] = []
        drop (suc n) (_ ∷ xs) = drop n xs
dropLIST _ l = l

map-cong : ∀{A B : Set}{xs : L.List A}{f g : A → B}
     → (∀ x → f x ≡ g x)
     → L.map f xs ≡ L.map g xs
map-cong {xs = L.[]} p = refl
map-cong {xs = x L.∷ xs} p = cong₂ L._∷_ (p x) (map-cong p)

infixr 5 _∷_

{-# COMPILE GHC List = data [] ([] | (:)) #-}

```
## Arrays

```

postulate Array : Set → Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified Data.Vector.Strict as Strict #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC Array = type Strict.Vector #-}

variable A : Set

postulate
  HSlengthOfArray : Array A → ℤ
  HSlistToArray : (ls : List A) → Array A
  HSindexArray : Array A → ℤ → A
-- These have to consume the hidden {A : Set} param in the Agda.
{-# COMPILE GHC HSlengthOfArray = \() -> \as -> toInteger (Strict.length as) #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC HSlistToArray = \() -> Strict.fromList #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC HSindexArray = \() -> \as -> \i -> as Strict.! (fromInteger i) #-}

-- This only exists for literal arrays in certificates,
-- much like mkBytestring above.
postulate
  mkArray : {A : Set} → List A → Array A

```
## DATA
```

data DATA : Set where
  ConstrDATA :  I.ℤ → List DATA → DATA
  MapDATA : List (DATA × DATA) → DATA
  ListDATA : List DATA → DATA
  iDATA : I.ℤ → DATA
  bDATA : ByteString → DATA

{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Data as D #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC DATA = data Data (D.Constr | D.Map | D.List | D.I | D.B)   #-}

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
{-# TERMINATING #-}
eqDATA : DATA → DATA → Bool
eqDATA (ConstrDATA i₁ l₁) (ConstrDATA i₂ l₂) =
    (Relation.Nullary.isYes (i₁ Data.Integer.≟ i₂))
  Data.Bool.∧
    L.and (L.zipWith eqDATA (toList l₁) (toList l₂))
eqDATA (ConstrDATA x x₁) (MapDATA x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ConstrDATA x x₁) (ListDATA x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ConstrDATA x x₁) (iDATA x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ConstrDATA x x₁) (bDATA x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (MapDATA x) (ConstrDATA x₁ x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (MapDATA m₁) (MapDATA m₂) =
  L.and
    (L.zipWith
      (λ (x₁ , y₁) (x₂ , y₂) → eqDATA x₁ x₂ Data.Bool.∧ eqDATA y₁ y₂)
      (toList m₁)
      (toList m₂)
    )
eqDATA (MapDATA x) (ListDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (MapDATA x) (iDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (MapDATA x) (bDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (ConstrDATA x₁ x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (MapDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (ListDATA x₁) = L.and (L.zipWith eqDATA (toList x) (toList x₁))
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (iDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (ListDATA x) (bDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (iDATA x) (ConstrDATA x₁ x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (iDATA x) (MapDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (iDATA x) (ListDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (iDATA i₁) (iDATA i₂) = Relation.Nullary.isYes (i₁ Data.Integer.≟ i₂)
eqDATA (iDATA x) (bDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (bDATA x) (ConstrDATA x₁ x₂) = Bool.false
eqDATA (bDATA x) (MapDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (bDATA x) (ListDATA x₁) = Bool.false
eqDATA (bDATA x) (iDATA x₁) = Bool.false
-- Warning: eqByteString is always trivially true at the Agda level.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqDATA (bDATA b₁) (bDATA b₂) = eqByteString b₁ b₂
{-# COMPILE GHC eqDATA = (==) #-}

postulate Bls12-381-G1-Element : Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified PlutusCore.Crypto.BLS12_381.G1 as G1 #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC Bls12-381-G1-Element = type G1.Element #-}

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqBls12-381-G1-Element : Bls12-381-G1-Element → Bls12-381-G1-Element → Bool
eqBls12-381-G1-Element _ _ = Bool.true
{-# COMPILE GHC eqBls12-381-G1-Element = (==) #-}

postulate Bls12-381-G2-Element : Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified PlutusCore.Crypto.BLS12_381.G2 as G2 #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC Bls12-381-G2-Element = type G2.Element #-}

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqBls12-381-G2-Element : Bls12-381-G2-Element → Bls12-381-G2-Element → Bool
eqBls12-381-G2-Element _ _ = Bool.true
{-# COMPILE GHC eqBls12-381-G2-Element = (==) #-}

postulate Bls12-381-MlResult : Set
{-# FOREIGN GHC import qualified PlutusCore.Crypto.BLS12_381.Pairing as Pairing #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC Bls12-381-MlResult = type Pairing.MlResult #-}

-- Agda implementation should only be used as part of deciding builtin equality.
-- See "Decidable Equality of Builtins" in "VerifiedCompilation.Equality".
eqBls12-381-MlResult : Bls12-381-MlResult → Bls12-381-MlResult → Bool
eqBls12-381-MlResult _ _ = Bool.true
{-# COMPILE GHC eqBls12-381-MlResult = (==) #-}
```

## Kinds

The kind of types is `*`. Plutus core core is based on System Fω which
is higher order so we have `⇒` for type level functions. We also have
a kind called `#` which is used for builtin types.

```
data Kind : Set where
  *   : Kind               -- type
  ♯   : Kind               -- builtin
  _⇒_ : Kind → Kind → Kind -- function kind

{-# COMPILE GHC Kind = data KIND (Star | Sharp | Arrow )         #-}
```

Let `I`, `J`, `K` range over kinds:
```
variable
  I J K : Kind
```
