::: {.highlight}
haskell
:::

Compiling and testing a Plutus App in the Plutus Playground {#basic_playground_tutorial}
===========================================================

The Plutus Playground consists of a code editor and a simulator.

![Plutus Playground (code editor)](images/playground.png)

We can write Plutus Apps in the code editor and test them in the
simulator. The Plutus Playground includes a number of sample apps. In
this tutorial we are going to run through two of the sample apps.

Running the \"Hello, World\" app {#playground-compiling-hello-world}
--------------------------------

When we first open the Plutus Playground, the code editor is populated
with the \"Vesting\" app. To load the \"Hello, World\" app, click the
link in the top row. This app is much simpler than the vesting app. In
fact, the app itself only consists of a single line, and a type
annotation:

::: {.literalinclude start-after="BLOCK1" end-before="BLOCK2"}
HelloWorldApp.hs
:::

### Running the first simulation

Now that the app has been compiled, we can run it in the simulated
environment. The builtin examples are already compiled, so we can click
\"Simulate\" right away.

::: {.note}
::: {.admonition-title}
Note
:::

If an app has not been compiled yet, the \"Simulate\" button is
deactivated. To compile the app, click the \"Compile\" button. The
feedback line at the bottom of the code editor changes to
\"Compiling\...\". When the app has been compiled without errors, the
feedback message changes to \"Compilation successful\", and the
\"Simulate\" button is active.
:::

Click the \"Simulate\" button. The code editor disappears and the
simulator opens.

![Plutus Playground (simulator)](images/playground-simulator.png)

We can use the simulator to define complex scenarios with multiple
agents trading and communicating over the Cardano blockchain. For the
\"Hello, World\" app however we don\'t need to change anything in the
simulator. We can click \"Evaluate\" right away. This sends the
simulation to the server, alongside the source code of our app. When the
server is done running the simulation, the transactions pane opens,
showing the outcome of the simulation.

### Interpreting the results of the first simulation

The \"Transactions\" pane has four sections: Blockchain, final balances,
logs and trace. The blockchain section shows all the transactions that
were produced during the simulation.

![Simulated blockchain with a single
transaction](images/playground-transactions.png)

Each simulation is run on a fresh blockchain. The \"Hello, World\"
simulation only results in a single transaction. This is the initial
transaction that distributes some funds to the simulated agents. We can
click the box that says \"Slot 0, Tx 0\" to examine the transaction. Now
there are two new sections visible. The first of the new sections shows
the inputs and outputs of the selected transaction, and some other
details. The second of the new sections has a table with the balances of
each address *after* the selected transaction. We can see that wallet 1
and wallet 2 each have ten lovelace.

Below this there is a chart showing the final balances at the end of the
simulation, after all transactions. Since we only have a single
transaction, the final balances are exactly the same as the \"Balances
Carried Forward\" from the initial transaction.

![Log output from the \"Hello, World\"
simulation](images/playground-logs.png)

Next is the \"Logs\" section. Here we can see messages that were
produced by the emulator during the simulation. The logs tell us that
the initial transaction was validated, then the slot number changed, and
then the app running in each wallet produced a log message saying
\"Hello, World\".

::: {.note}
::: {.admonition-title}
Note
:::

Each of the simulated wallets has its own application instance with its
own state. This is why the message \"Hello, world\" appears twice in the
emulator logs.
:::

The final \"Trace\" section contains some more detailed information
about the emulator. This data is useful for diagnosing problems with the
app.

### Adding a payment to the first simulation

Now we\'re going to extend the simulation by adding a new wallet and a
payment between two wallets. Click the close button to get back to the
simulator. In the \"Wallets\" section of the simulator there is a box
for each simulated wallet. Click the \"Add Wallet\" button to add a new
simulated wallet. Now click \"Pay to Wallet\" on wallet 3. In the
\"Actions\" section there are now two entries, a \"Wait\" action and a
\"Pay to Wallet\" action.

In the \"Pay to Wallet\" action, enter the number 2 into the
\"Recipient\" field. This means that wallet 2 is the recipient of the
payment (the payer is wallet 3). Change the amount to 5 lovelace.

Now we need to make sure our simulation runs long enough for the payment
to appear on the blockchain. The simulation ends after the last action
in the action sequence. To make it run a little longer, click the \"Add
Wait Action\" button. Another \"Wait\" action is added to the end of the
list.

![Action sequence for a payment of 5 lovelace from wallet 3 to wallet
2.](images/playground-payment.png)

Now click \"Evaluate\". The results pane opens and we can see that the
blockchain has two transactions. Click the second transaction. It has
one input (a public-key output belonging to wallet 3) and two outputs:
One output with five lovelace belonging to wallet 2, and another output
with the remaining five lovelace belonging to wallet 3. This second
output is called a *change output*. It is needed because the input that
was spent contained ten lovelace, and we only wanted to pay five of them
to wallet 2. Therefore the remaining five lovelace were given back to
wallet 3.

The \"Balances carried forward\" and \"Final balances\" sections also
reflect the payment that was made.

Finally, the logs tell us that there are now three instances running,
because the \"Hello, world\" message shows up three times. We can see
that the payment transaction was validated, and that the simulation ran
until slot 12.

Running the \"Vesting\" app
---------------------------

We\'ve seen how to compile code, run simulations and make sense of their
output. In the second part of this tutorial we are going to run an app
that actually does something on the blockchain, and we\'re going to feed
input to it using the endpoints that it provides.

Click the \"Vesting\" link in the row of demo files at the top. The
vesting app is loaded into the code editor. We are not going to look at
the source for now (there are comments in the code explaining how it
works).

::: {.note}
::: {.admonition-title}
Note
:::

The vesting app locks some funds in a script. The recipient of the funds
can retrieve them later, when some time has passed.
:::

Click \"Compile\" and then \"Simulate\" to get to the simulator. The
vesting app comes with a predefined simulation of a total of six
actions. Besides the \"Wait\" actions which we\'ve seen before, there
are some app-specific actions: \"vest funds\" and \"retrieve funds\".
The vesting app defines endpoints with those names and uses them to ask
for input.

The box for the \"vest funds\" action is empty. This endpoint is there
to tell the app to make a payment to the address of the vesting script.
The box for the \"retrieve funds\" endpoint has an input field for an
Ada amount. In each of the two invocations we retrieve four lovelace.

Each endpoint used by an app has its own type (number, text, currency,
etc.) that is defined in the source code. The Plutus Playground uses
this type to provide the correct set of form elements for creating a
value of the type. That way we don\'t need to manually enter JSON
objects into the action boxes, and we can perform some basic validation
of the values.

### Running the vesting simulation

Let\'s click \"Evaluate\" to see what the simulation does. There are
four transactions.

![Blockchain of the vesting
simulation.](images/playground-vesting-blockchain.png)

The highlighted transaction locks eight lovelace with the vesting
script.

Select the transaction in slot 1. One of its outputs is a script output.
This is the vesting script that locks eight lovelace.

Now select the next transaction (Slot 21, Tx 0). It spends the script
output, paying four lovelace to wallet 1 and the remaining four lovelace
to the vesting script.

Note that the script address of the input and of the output are
identical. The script address always stays the same, but the number of
outputs at the address changes over time.

::: {.note}
::: {.admonition-title}
Note
:::

At any point in time there may be zero, one or more outputs at the
script address. All those outputs together constitute the *state* of the
script. We change the state by spending and producing outputs at the
script address.
:::

The final transaction (Slot 61, Tx 0) takes the remaining four lovelace
from the script and places them in a public-key output belonging to
wallet 1.

At the end of the simulation, wallet 1 has eight lovelace more than it
started out with. The money came from wallet 2 via the vesting script.
Note the timing: Wallet 1 retrieved the funds in slot 21 and 61. The
vesting contract defines how long the funds have to stay locked in the
script before the recipient can retrieve them.

### Dealing with failure

Let\'s return to the simulator by clicking the \"X\" button on the
transactions pane. Change the first \"Wait\" action to wait for 10
blocks instead of 20 and click \"Evaluate\".

![Vesting simulation modified to produce an
error.](images/playground-vesting-actions-modified.png)

Now there are only two transactions. The simlation finished with the
total of eight lovelace still locked by the script.

Scroll down to the \"Trace\" section of the transactions view. Among the
messages for slot 11 there is one that says
`Contract instance stopped with error`. It explains the reason for the
failure. Wallet 1 attempted to retrieve the funds before it was allowed
to do so. The app instance for wallet 1 then stopped with an error and
did not process any more endpoint calls.

It is important to realise the source of the error. The error came from
the *client* (wallet one), not from the blockchain. If it had come from
the blockchain we would have seen a failed transaction in the logs.

The app running in wallet one did not attempt to submit a transaction
for retrieving the funds, because such a transaction would fail to
validate. Instead, the app stopped with an error, leaving the on-chain
state untouched. This is another example the different notions of state
that we are dealing with in Plutus apps.

::: {.note}
::: {.admonition-title}
Note
:::

Plutus Apps are distributed applications. Their state is spread across
different locations on-chain and off-chain.
:::

Exercise
--------

As an exercise, load the \"Starter\" app, compile it and run the default
simulation. Check the logs to see an example of an on-chain error in the
Playground.
