plutus-metatheory/src/Cost/Raw.lagda.md, before:

---
title: Cost.Raw
layout: page
---
# Raw Cost structures to inferface with Haskell

```
module Cost.Raw where
```

## Imports

```
open import Cost.Base using (CostingNat)
open import Data.String
open import Utils
```

## Interface with Haskell Machine Parameters

```
{-# FOREIGN GHC import Data.SatInt (fromSatInt) #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import Data.Functor.Identity (Identity, runIdentity) #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.ExBudget (ExBudget(..))  #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.ExMemory (ExCPU(..), ExMemory(..)) #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.ExBudgetingDefaults (defaultCekMachineCostsForTesting) #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import UntypedPlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.Cek.CekMachineCosts (CekMachineCostsBase(..)) #-}

postulate HCekMachineCosts : Set
postulate HExBudget : Set

{-# COMPILE GHC HCekMachineCosts = type CekMachineCostsBase Identity #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC HExBudget = type ExBudget #-}

postulate getCekStartupCost : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekVarCost     : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekConstCost   : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekLamCost     : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekDelayCost   : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekForceCost   : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekApplyCost   : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekBuiltinCost : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekConstrCost  : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekCaseCost    : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget

{-# COMPILE GHC getCekStartupCost = runIdentity . cekStartupCost  #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekVarCost     = runIdentity . cekVarCost      #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekConstCost   = runIdentity . cekConstCost    #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekLamCost     = runIdentity . cekLamCost      #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekDelayCost   = runIdentity . cekDelayCost    #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekForceCost   = runIdentity . cekForceCost    #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekApplyCost   = runIdentity . cekApplyCost    #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekBuiltinCost = runIdentity . cekBuiltinCost  #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekConstrCost  = runIdentity . cekConstrCost   #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekCaseCost    = runIdentity . cekCaseCost     #-}

postulate getCPUCost : HExBudget → CostingNat
postulate getMemoryCost : HExBudget → CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC getCPUCost = fromSatInt . (\(ExCPU x) -> x) . exBudgetCPU  #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getMemoryCost = fromSatInt . (\(ExMemory x) -> x) . exBudgetMemory  #-}

-- postulate defaultHCekMachineCosts : HCekMachineCosts

-- {-# COMPILE GHC defaultHCekMachineCosts = defaultCekMachineCostsForTesting #-}
```

## Interface with Builtin model from JSON

```
{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.CostingFun.SimpleJSON  #-}

record LinearFunction : Set where
    constructor mkLinearFunction
    field
        intercept : CostingNat
        slope : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC LinearFunction = data LinearFunction(LinearFunction) #-}

record OneVariableQuadraticFunction : Set where
    constructor mkOneVariableQuadraticFunction
    field
        coeff0 : CostingNat
        coeff1 : CostingNat
        coeff2 : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC OneVariableQuadraticFunction = data OneVariableQuadraticFunction(OneVariableQuadraticFunction) #-}

record TwoVariableLinearFunction : Set where
    constructor mkTwoVariableLinearFunction
    field
        intercept : CostingNat
        slope1 : CostingNat
        slope2 : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC TwoVariableLinearFunction = data TwoVariableLinearFunction(TwoVariableLinearFunction) #-}

record TwoVariableQuadraticFunction : Set where
    constructor mkTwoVariableQuadraticFunction
    field
        minimum : CostingNat
        coeff00 : CostingNat
        coeff10 : CostingNat
        coeff01 : CostingNat
        coeff20 : CostingNat
        coeff11 : CostingNat
        coeff02 : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC TwoVariableQuadraticFunction = data TwoVariableQuadraticFunction(TwoVariableQuadraticFunction) #-}

record TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction : Set where
    constructor mkTwoVariableWithInteractionFunction
    field
        coeff00' : CostingNat
        coeff10' : CostingNat
        coeff01' : CostingNat
        coeff11' : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction = data TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction(TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction) #-}

record ExpModCostingFunction : Set where
    constructor mkExpModCostingFunction
    field
        coeff00 : CostingNat
        coeff11 : CostingNat
        coeff12 : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC ExpModCostingFunction = data ExpModCostingFunction(ExpModCostingFunction) #-}

data RawModel : Set where
    ConstantCost           : CostingNat → RawModel
    AddedSizes             : LinearFunction → RawModel
    MultipliedSizes        : LinearFunction → RawModel
    MinSize                : LinearFunction → RawModel
    MaxSize                : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInX              : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInY              : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInZ              : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInU              : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LiteralInYOrLinearInZ  : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInMaxYZ          : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInYAndZ          : TwoVariableLinearFunction -> RawModel
    QuadraticInY           : OneVariableQuadraticFunction → RawModel
    QuadraticInZ           : OneVariableQuadraticFunction → RawModel
    QuadraticInXAndY       : TwoVariableQuadraticFunction → RawModel
    WithInteractionInXAndY : TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction → RawModel
    SubtractedSizes        : LinearFunction → CostingNat → RawModel
    ConstAboveDiagonal     : CostingNat → RawModel → RawModel
    ConstBelowDiagonal     : CostingNat → RawModel → RawModel
    ConstOffDiagonal       : CostingNat → RawModel → RawModel
    ExpModCost             : ExpModCostingFunction → RawModel

{-# COMPILE GHC RawModel = data Model (ConstantCost | AddedSizes |
    MultipliedSizes | MinSize | MaxSize | LinearInX | LinearInY | LinearInZ |
    LinearInU | LiteralInYOrLinearInZ | LinearInMaxYZ | LinearInYAndZ |
    QuadraticInY | QuadraticInZ | QuadraticInXAndY | WithInteractionInXAndY | 
    SubtractedSizes | ConstAboveDiagonal | ConstBelowDiagonal | 
    ConstOffDiagonal | ExpModCost) #-}

record CpuAndMemoryModel : Set where
     constructor mkCpuAndMemoryModel
     field
        cpuModel : RawModel
        memoryModel : RawModel

{-# COMPILE GHC CpuAndMemoryModel = data CpuAndMemoryModel (CpuAndMemoryModel) #-}

BuiltinCostMap : Set
BuiltinCostMap = List (String × CpuAndMemoryModel)
```

```
RawCostModel : Set
RawCostModel = HCekMachineCosts × BuiltinCostMap
```

Commit message:

fix(metatheory): add LinearInXAndY constructor to RawModel
Add missing LinearInXAndY constructor to the Agda RawModel type
and regenerate MAlonzo Haskell code. This constructor was added
to the Haskell Model type but was missing from the Agda source,
causing incomplete pattern match warnings during compilation.

The LinearInXAndY model is used for valueContains costing as
part of the const_above_diagonal approach.

plutus-metatheory/src/Cost/Raw.lagda.md, after:

---
title: Cost.Raw
layout: page
---
# Raw Cost structures to inferface with Haskell

```
module Cost.Raw where
```

## Imports

```
open import Cost.Base using (CostingNat)
open import Data.String
open import Utils
```

## Interface with Haskell Machine Parameters

```
{-# FOREIGN GHC import Data.SatInt (fromSatInt) #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import Data.Functor.Identity (Identity, runIdentity) #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.ExBudget (ExBudget(..))  #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.ExMemory (ExCPU(..), ExMemory(..)) #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.ExBudgetingDefaults (defaultCekMachineCostsForTesting) #-}
{-# FOREIGN GHC import UntypedPlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.Cek.CekMachineCosts (CekMachineCostsBase(..)) #-}

postulate HCekMachineCosts : Set
postulate HExBudget : Set

{-# COMPILE GHC HCekMachineCosts = type CekMachineCostsBase Identity #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC HExBudget = type ExBudget #-}

postulate getCekStartupCost : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekVarCost     : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekConstCost   : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekLamCost     : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekDelayCost   : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekForceCost   : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekApplyCost   : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekBuiltinCost : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekConstrCost  : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget
postulate getCekCaseCost    : HCekMachineCosts →  HExBudget

{-# COMPILE GHC getCekStartupCost = runIdentity . cekStartupCost  #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekVarCost     = runIdentity . cekVarCost      #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekConstCost   = runIdentity . cekConstCost    #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekLamCost     = runIdentity . cekLamCost      #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekDelayCost   = runIdentity . cekDelayCost    #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekForceCost   = runIdentity . cekForceCost    #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekApplyCost   = runIdentity . cekApplyCost    #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekBuiltinCost = runIdentity . cekBuiltinCost  #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekConstrCost  = runIdentity . cekConstrCost   #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getCekCaseCost    = runIdentity . cekCaseCost     #-}

postulate getCPUCost : HExBudget → CostingNat
postulate getMemoryCost : HExBudget → CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC getCPUCost = fromSatInt . (\(ExCPU x) -> x) . exBudgetCPU  #-}
{-# COMPILE GHC getMemoryCost = fromSatInt . (\(ExMemory x) -> x) . exBudgetMemory  #-}

-- postulate defaultHCekMachineCosts : HCekMachineCosts

-- {-# COMPILE GHC defaultHCekMachineCosts = defaultCekMachineCostsForTesting #-}
```

## Interface with Builtin model from JSON

```
{-# FOREIGN GHC import PlutusCore.Evaluation.Machine.CostingFun.SimpleJSON  #-}

record LinearFunction : Set where
    constructor mkLinearFunction
    field
        intercept : CostingNat
        slope : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC LinearFunction = data LinearFunction(LinearFunction) #-}

record OneVariableQuadraticFunction : Set where
    constructor mkOneVariableQuadraticFunction
    field
        coeff0 : CostingNat
        coeff1 : CostingNat
        coeff2 : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC OneVariableQuadraticFunction = data OneVariableQuadraticFunction(OneVariableQuadraticFunction) #-}

record TwoVariableLinearFunction : Set where
    constructor mkTwoVariableLinearFunction
    field
        intercept : CostingNat
        slope1 : CostingNat
        slope2 : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC TwoVariableLinearFunction = data TwoVariableLinearFunction(TwoVariableLinearFunction) #-}

record TwoVariableQuadraticFunction : Set where
    constructor mkTwoVariableQuadraticFunction
    field
        minimum : CostingNat
        coeff00 : CostingNat
        coeff10 : CostingNat
        coeff01 : CostingNat
        coeff20 : CostingNat
        coeff11 : CostingNat
        coeff02 : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC TwoVariableQuadraticFunction = data TwoVariableQuadraticFunction(TwoVariableQuadraticFunction) #-}

record TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction : Set where
    constructor mkTwoVariableWithInteractionFunction
    field
        coeff00' : CostingNat
        coeff10' : CostingNat
        coeff01' : CostingNat
        coeff11' : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction = data TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction(TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction) #-}

record ExpModCostingFunction : Set where
    constructor mkExpModCostingFunction
    field
        coeff00 : CostingNat
        coeff11 : CostingNat
        coeff12 : CostingNat

{-# COMPILE GHC ExpModCostingFunction = data ExpModCostingFunction(ExpModCostingFunction) #-}

data RawModel : Set where
    ConstantCost           : CostingNat → RawModel
    AddedSizes             : LinearFunction → RawModel
    MultipliedSizes        : LinearFunction → RawModel
    MinSize                : LinearFunction → RawModel
    MaxSize                : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInX              : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInY              : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInZ              : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInU              : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LiteralInYOrLinearInZ  : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInMaxYZ          : LinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInXAndY          : TwoVariableLinearFunction → RawModel
    LinearInYAndZ          : TwoVariableLinearFunction -> RawModel
    QuadraticInY           : OneVariableQuadraticFunction → RawModel
    QuadraticInZ           : OneVariableQuadraticFunction → RawModel
    QuadraticInXAndY       : TwoVariableQuadraticFunction → RawModel
    WithInteractionInXAndY : TwoVariableWithInteractionFunction → RawModel
    SubtractedSizes        : LinearFunction → CostingNat → RawModel
    ConstAboveDiagonal     : CostingNat → RawModel → RawModel
    ConstBelowDiagonal     : CostingNat → RawModel → RawModel
    ConstOffDiagonal       : CostingNat → RawModel → RawModel
    ExpModCost             : ExpModCostingFunction → RawModel

{-# COMPILE GHC RawModel = data Model (ConstantCost | AddedSizes |
    MultipliedSizes | MinSize | MaxSize | LinearInX | LinearInY | LinearInZ |
    LinearInU | LiteralInYOrLinearInZ | LinearInMaxYZ | LinearInXAndY |
    LinearInYAndZ | QuadraticInY | QuadraticInZ | QuadraticInXAndY |
    WithInteractionInXAndY | SubtractedSizes | ConstAboveDiagonal |
    ConstBelowDiagonal | ConstOffDiagonal | ExpModCost) #-}

record CpuAndMemoryModel : Set where
     constructor mkCpuAndMemoryModel
     field
        cpuModel : RawModel
        memoryModel : RawModel

{-# COMPILE GHC CpuAndMemoryModel = data CpuAndMemoryModel (CpuAndMemoryModel) #-}

BuiltinCostMap : Set
BuiltinCostMap = List (String × CpuAndMemoryModel)
```

```
RawCostModel : Set
RawCostModel = HCekMachineCosts × BuiltinCostMap
```
